The Best Book Promotion Sites in 2026
Posted by David Gaughran March 12, 2026. Marketing • 229 Comments.
These are the very best book promotion services in 2026 for boosting your sales, launches, free promotions, series deals, and mailing list sign-ups. Something for all budgets and experience levels with self-publishing – including a few options to promote your book which are completely free!
This list of book promo sites is curated by me personally. All sites below have been vetted and tested in a range of genres, and are here because of results.
You can skip to the section you are looking for below but make sure to check the end for a free course on how to build a marketing campaign. Yes, that’s right, a completely free course on how to promote a book. Read on, pilgrim!
	Promo Sites Explained
	Boost Sales With Promo Stacking
	BookBub
	Free Promotions
	Discounts
	Genre Specialists
	Series Promotions
	List Builders
	Follow Promos
	Money Savers
	Create A Marketing Campaign
Promo Sites Explained
There’s a whole section at the end on how to use what you might call promo sites, deal sites, ad sites, or readers sites, depending – you would think a community of writers might have nailed down the nomenclature around book promotions after ten years, but there you go.
Promo sites are basically like Groupon for ebooks: authors pay a fee to have their book listed in the daily offers – usually sent out by email – and they get lots of sales or downloads in return. Readers get freebies and discounts, and the author’s book jumps into the charts; everyone wins.
There’s a lot more to using these sites effectively in terms of strategy, and see the Build A Marketing Campaign section at the end for free resources to help you there, but those are the basics of book promotion for self-published authors. We focus a lot on price promotions – i.e. running discounts on books to get sales moving.
Boost Sales With Promo Stacking
The very best way to use promo sites is to “stack” your promos, as experienced self-publishers say – which just means running several at once. However, don’t make the mistake of running them all on the same day.
The best way to stack promos is one after the other. Here’s a short video explaining the technique:

BookBub
The Big Daddy of book promo sites deserves a category of its own as it is a different beast. A much larger beast.
BookBub arrived on the scene several years ago and utterly transformed book promotion. It now has way more juice than everything else here combined. Which is no surprise when you discover they have over ten million voracious readers subscribed to its lists.
Sign up as reader to the BookBub Featured Deals email and select your favorite genres from 42 categories. You will get daily emails with a range of books. Household names, undiscovered gems, traditionally published, small press, and self-published. A real mix of free books, 99¢ deals, and a few $1.99/$2.99 books – but even those are usually heavily discounted. Reader-me checks it daily.
BookBub Featured Deals
Getting your book into BookBub’s Featured Deals email is expensive. You can check the full price list here. What you will see is that a 99¢ Featured Deal will cost anything from $152 to $1,000+ depending on category size. Your book will go out to 2m-4m readers in the case of the more expensive categories, and you could sell thousands of books. Authors typically report making their money back in twenty-four hours, and enjoying sustained sales for a period afterwards also. Also keep in mind there are much cheaper sites below, if that up-front cost is too high a barrier.
It’s a little cheaper to get a freebie featured, and more expensive for higher-priced books. (I don’t recommend doing the latter.) My last free run generated around 40,000 downloads – to give you an idea how powerful this option can be.
The biggest stumbling block with BookBub isn’t the cost. It’s the difficulty of getting picked. You must apply, and BookBub says it only accepts 20% of applicants. (I’m guessing Dan Brown has a slightly better chance than most, so you and me probably face tighter odds.) If you are exclusive to Amazon, or don’t have very many reviews on your book, or your presentation isn’t excellent, your chances of getting picked are very slim indeed. To apply, your first step is to sign up for BookBub Partners account – which I recommend doing anyway, and populating your books on the platform so readers can discover them.
BookBub Ads
There is another way to reach this passionate audience of 10m readers – one which I’ve written a guide to called BookBub Ads Expert. A warning: the BookBub Ads platform is not for beginners; I recommend perusing the cheaper options below instead unless you are experienced.
Free Book Promotions
Free book promotions refer to promoting a book which is free, rather than promotions which cost nothing (but those exist too – see below). These free promos are often the easiest and cheapest to put together, giving the best return in terms of simply getting your books into readers’ hands. Here are my favourite sites, in order of preference. In 2026 – as has been the case for several years now – free promotions generally get the best return.
	Freebooksy ($30-$120)
	Fussy Librarian ($15-$79)
	ENT ($45-$55)
	RobinReads ($60-$85)
	BookRaid ($0.15 a click, capped at a max charge of $60)
	EReaderIQ ($10-$30)
	BKNights ($5… +$5 more to be featured in the email, which is the good part)
	BookBassett ($9)
Note: Freebooksy and some others provide a “promo stacks” service where they will automatically book you into several different sites. I don’t recommend doing this. It’s far better to do it manually – see my video for a guide – not least because these stacks often include sub-par sites which I don’t recommend . The series promos on Freebooksy are great though and are discussed in detail below.
Discounts
Some sites which are fab with freebies are not so good with discounted books so I have a different set of recommendations here. Most only accept 99¢ deals but that’s almost always the best way to run a discount anyway. These promos aren’t as powerful as they used to be – alas – but I still see great value in them when used strategically (see the video above ). Again, these are in rough order of preference.
	ENT ($45-$75)
	RobinReads ($60-$85)
	Fussy Librarian ($10-$22)
	BookRaid ($0.20 a click, capped at a max charge of $60)
	BargainBooksy ($20-$85)
	EreaderIQ ($5-$20)
Also check the genre-specific deal sites below for further options.
Genre Specialists
These sites are recommended for both freebies and discounts, as long as your book is the right genre, of course.
	Red Feather Romance (Romance/Erotica – $95-$135 – series promos also available!)
	Book Barbarian (SF/F – $40-$60)
	Red Roses Romance (Romance/Erotica – $25-$45)
	Book Adrenaline (Thrillers/Mystery/Crime – $20-$35)
Your genre isn’t listed? Hey, I feel you. But these sites are among the newer of those featured, so hopefully things will continue to develop in that manner. Some of the above are innovating in other useful ways, like allowing you to feature more than one book. Speaking of…
Series Promotions
Some book promo sites are finally offering options to push several books at once – ideal for a series. As always, bolded items are stronger recommendations.
	Freebooksy ($65-$245) – the gold standard of series promotions. Results continue to be stellar from this fresh approach to series promotion which launched in beta in late 2021. Moves the needle in multiple genres: thrillers, romance, horror, SF/F, paranormal, YA, and non-fiction. Strongly recommended. More on how it works.
	Red Feather Romance ($185) – from the same people as Freebooksy (Written Word Media).
	EreaderIQ ($10-$25+… depending on your series length) – a regular free/discounted promo but they let you add mention of more books/formats for a nominal fee. Note: the other titles featured don’t strictly have to be in the same series.
	BookBasset ($22) – a featured author promo where they will also let you add up to four more books of yours (included in the price), as long as they are $2.99 or less; they strongly advise at least one book is free.
	BookDoggy ($21-$24) – this is also more of a regular free/discounted promo but where they let you add a mention of your series page. A cool add-on I wish was universal.
	BookAdrenaline/BookBarbarian/Red Roses Romance – this family of genre specialists (detailed in the above section) let’s you add a second book to a Standard Listing for a small additional fee.
Site owners: please add more series promotion options like the above!
List Builders
A warning: list builders are best used to augment your organic list-building efforts, not to replace them. If your mailing list needs a quick injection of fresh blood, list builders can be very useful. Just remember to use this tactic sparingly.
This is not a replacement for getting subscribers organically, or a short-cut to getting a big and healthy mailing list.
If your mailing list is solely garnered from from list-builders and competitions and the like, then you might have an issue.
That said, they have their place, and I like using them strategically. This is an affiliate link, but BookSweeps is the best around – in my experience it drives much higher quality sign-ups, and the execution overall is generally much slicker, and you get to participate with much bigger authors too.
BookSweeps has recently brought in a new viral builder, which can bring thousands of emails, rather than hundreds. I’ve experimented with it and found it good value, but I’d recommend starting on the cheaper ones so that you learn the ropes. To get the best results, import the email addresses as soon as you receive them (when the promo ends), and onboard them carefully.
	BookSweeps ($50 for the regular promo, $250 for the new viral builder)
Money Savers
Times are tight! If you have a restricted budget, and can’t just jump on everything here, these are my top value, lower cost picks from everything available – including some freebies for you too.
Fussy Librarian – regularly runs discounts if you sign up to their author newsletter.
OHFB – a nice-looking site but I don’t think the $75/$100 promos are close to being worth the cost. However, this option is free (but there’s no guarantee of being picked).
Digital Book Today – I must try the $20 free book promo here again soon as it has been a while, but this promo is free.
And then out of the sites previously mentioned, Freebooksy is the best value for freebies if you can afford (go with ENT or Fussy Librarian if you can’t). Robin Reads and ENT vie for top spot for discounts, but BookBarbarian gives them a run for their money if you write SF/F.
The Freebooksy series promo is stellar, but it’s not that cheap. EreaderIQ has far less juice, but it’s a nice option if money is very tight, or a nice augment to Freebooksy if you have money to spread around.
Keep this in mind: I’m firmly of the opinion that it’s better to let your books slide for a while and organize a really good promotion every so often, than to be promoting all the time and using lesser value sites. Use that time for writing instead – publishing something new is always the greatest promo strategy!
Create A Marketing Campaign
Booking a promotion above is a good first step when it comes to marketing, but if you want to build a real marketing campaign, if you want to come up with a killer launch plan for your next release, then you must check out my FREE course Starting From Zero.
Join 20,000 authors and learn everything about how to promote your books, from branding, packaging, and positioning, to building your list and platform, to handling a book launch or other type of promotion.
Best part? It won’t cost you a penny.

Questions
Pop your questions on book promotions in the box below. I’ll get a ping right away, and answer you once I’m finished alphabetizing my collection of fine hams.

-----------

How To Self-Publish A Book In 10 Steps [2026]
Posted by David Gaughran March 12, 2026. Publishing, Resources • 533 Comments.

Do you want to learn exactly how to self-publish a book like a pro? I’ve been doing this for fifteen years now — is it 2026 already?!? — and I’ve created this comprehensive guide to help you through theten steps to successful self-publishing.

This guide covers everything from how to write a book that readers actually want, finding a professional editor, learning your niche and nailing your branding, how to format that manuscript of yours so it’s a perfectly reflowable ebook (some serious pitfalls here if you don’t know what you are doing), what price you should stick on that book of yours so that you can be enticing to readers but still make some scratch, and a few pointers on how to sell the blasted thing – as if you didn’t have enough to be getting on with! And that’s just for starters.

It’s a long, comprehensive post so use the menu below to click ahead, if needed. If you want my recommendation, grab a sandwich and read the whole thing. Hell, two sandwiches – it’s a monster – but there is a treat for you at the end. (It’s not another sandwich.) There’s even a place for you to ask questions at the bottom… if you have any left after digesting this beast!

Write A Book Readers Want
Find A Professional Editor
Know Your Niche & Nail Your Branding
Design Your Cover
Lay Out Your Book To Capture Readers
Format Your MS Into A Reflowable Ebook
Decide Your Price
Optimize Your Metadata
Distribute Your Book
Create A Marketing Plan & Get Reviews
[FREE BONUS] Guide To Building Your Author Platform
Your Questions On Self-Publishing
1. Write A Book Readers Want
You can write whatever you like. This is one of the joys of self-publishing and being the captain of your authorship. However, if you wish to sell you must write a book which readers actually want to buy.

Here we run right into the first misconception authors can have about marketing. The aim of marketing – the non-sleazy variety – is to connect customers with products they already want to buy.

Marketing is not about creating a desire to purchase but tapping into one that is already there.

Writing to Market
Of course, that also means that marketing isn’t about convincing someone to buy something they don’t truly want. Which is a problem if you have written for a niche audience but you’re selling it to a broader one.

If you want to self-publish a tragic love story about star-crossed space weasels, or a time-travel murder mystery starring a cybernetic centaur and his non-corporeal nemesis Mister Stinkcloud, you can totally do that (and I would totally read it).

If your tastes lean more towards latter Han Dynasty poetry or you have a forever-burning desire to tell the true story of Second Punic War – but in the style of a sea shanty, of course – you can totally self-publish that as well.

You are the CEO of You, Inc. after all. However, if you want a career as a professional author you must consider the market.

Finding the Sweet Spot
This doesn’t mean you have to sell out, whatever that means. But you do have to seek the overlap between what you like to write and what actually sells.

Commercial considerations don’t end there – not if you are focused on building a career. If you are just a hobbyist, that’s perfectly fine and valid.

(And that’s not intended in any pejorative sense whatsoever. Both paths are valid. Just clearly delineating between writers seeking to build a full-time income and everyone else because the former requires a different toolkit.)

Size Matters
The career-minded self-publisher should note that novels sell much better than short stories. (But here’s some specific advice for short story writers.) And it’s far easier to build a full-time income if you write a series versus only publishing standalones. At least, that’s true for most genres and niches.

Virtually every piece of self-publishing advice must be caveated. Writers and readers and books are so diverse that often anything goes. Some generalities are necessary when dispensing advice, though, or else everything will end up qualified to death. So, let’s proceed with this firmly in mind: there’s an exception to every rule and authors love breaking rules.

Key point here is this: your personal preferences are irrelevant in one sense; the market doesn’t care what you prefer.

Going From Standalones to a Series
I started out self-publishing in several different genres. I focused more on short stories and standalones. As such, I can tell you the following with complete confidence.

It is much easier to make money if you focus on novel-length work in a commercially viable niche. A world or characters you can potentially spin out into a series too.

This advice really isn’t as limiting as it might sound; the market has swelled and balkanized to the point where that’s a rather generous runway for your story-plane and all sorts of sub-genres have become viable for self-publishers.

Maybe you’ll even surprise yourself! Personally, I found the process of considering the market and plotting out a potential series more enjoyable than predicted. And the increasing royalty checks from Amazon should make a rather comforting salve to any remaining discomfort.

Writing a book is an impressive feat. Getting all those words in the correct order is not as easy as Hollywood might suggest. And you should certainly congratulate yourself if you reach The End. You have genuinely achieved something special. And that puts you ahead of most people with literary inclinations. People who often never even start the book they have been talking about for years. Or rarely get beyond a few pages.

So, well done you. But now the real work starts.

Suggested Resources for Writing:
On Writing by Stephen King is a stone cold classic. This was the book that gave me the kick in the pants needed to go from coffee shop poseur to actual writer. Part-memoir, part-craft advice, it’s as interesting as it is readable – whether you’re a fan of his fiction or not. Especially great for beginners.

Take Off Your Pants by Libbie Hawker is more for intermediate and experienced authors. It’s my favorite book on the thorny issue of plotting. It doesn’t matter if you are a resolute pantser (i.e. an author who doesn’t plot ahead). This wonderful book will teach you how to take readers on an emotionally satisfying journey. And as you will learn in this book, that’s the most fundamental aspect of storytelling.

Let’s Get Digital is by me, so, whatever. But it is a comprehensive guide to every step in the self-publishing process. And it has a bit more to say about writing to market than you get above – at least how I view it. Most importantly: it has a bunch more of my favorite writing resources if you liked these recommendations. Also, it’s free, so if you have a spare click or two in your pocket… it’s all yours. Can’t say cheaper than that.

how to self-publish a book free self-publishing guide publish your book for free self-publishers costs self publishing advice how to
Finally, I don’t want writers of shorter stories to be dissuaded by this hard-nosed advice. There are plenty of ways that shorter pieces can work for you, and this guide goes through all your options.

publishing short stories story
2. Find A Professional Editor
Your work must be professionally edited if you are going to ask readers to pay for it. This is your one big compulsory expense in the entire self-publishing process. Feel free to plow your own furrow with almost anything else but it’s important not to skimp on editing.

I also suggest not looking at it as a cost per se. It’s an investment in you and your book and your professional development as a writer. I still learn a lot every time I go through the editorial process, even with my experience; it’s always money well spent. Let’s hope I placed that semi-colon correctly because I get hoisted by my own Picard every time I write about editing.

Hire a Pro
One of the biggest flubs a greenhorn self-publisher can make is to skip hiring a professional editor. Some try to do the editing themselves. Others get a journalist friend, or the teacher who lives next door, to edit their book. With all due respect to journalists and teachers (and DIYers), editing is a highly specialized skill set. Having a good grasp of grammar or a strong sense of style is insufficient.

Remember, there’s no bush league in publishing; your work will grace the shelves alongside the biggest books from the most famous authors in the world… and will be competing with those big names when trying to get reader attention.

Yes, editing can be expensive. But I’ll show you what type of editing you must outsource, and what you can handle in-house.

The Editorial Process
This is really confusing for newbies because there are multiple types of editing. Multiple kinds of editors. Different labels are in use for each of these editorial stages as well. And then sometimes terms are used slightly differently in self-publishing versus traditional publishing – just to muddy the waters further.

Some examples:

Content editing can be alternatively referred to as story editing or developmental editing. (Or dev edits, for fans of saving time.)
Structural editing could be viewed as part of content editing, or its own separate thing.
Sometimes line editing and copy editing are used interchangeably. These days, in the world of self-publishing at least, both are usually done together by a copy editor. But technically they are distinct types of editing and are handled separately by traditional publishers – certainly the bigger ones, who have a more drawn-out editorial process.
Reaching for the sherry yet? I don’t blame you.

Let me simplify this, with apologies to devotees of editorial nuance. Here’s how it breaks down for the typical self-publisher.

Self-editing
This is exactly what it sounds like: an author editing their own book. It’s not a replacement for professional editing in any way *even when self-publishing). Let me be clear on that before someone smacks me upside the head with the Chicago Manual of Style (17th Edition).

Rather, self-editing is what an author must do before sending their manuscript to a professional editor. And if problems arise during the editorial process a manuscript might come back to you for further self-editing.

Story Editing
It’s alternatively known as developmental editing or content editing, but whatever you call story editing, it focuses on the big picture. Story stuff.

Is your “high concept” actually quite dumb? Did everyone see your “surprising” twist coming a mile away? Is the central romantic relationship credible? Are your jokes missing the mark? Is your heroine acting in such an out-of-character way that your readers are going to hurl their Kindles en masse into a lake? That kind of thing.

Beta Readers
At this point I should note that many self-publishers will use beta readers instead of hiring a developmental editor. A fully hands-on developmental edit is just so expensive. Which is because proper developmental editing is very time-consuming, not because such editors are some form of literary brigand.

Feedback from beta readers is usually incorporated at this point, in conjunction with doing multiple drafts and several self-editing passes. All this means the order of these first three steps can be highly fluid for people self-publishing. But they will all be completed before moving on to the next stage.

Copy Editing
Reason you need all the above in order first is that copy editing doesn’t look at that story stuff. Instead it’s about your use of language and mechanics – spelling, grammar, punctuation, and so on.

Traditionally, line editing is separate and focuses on style (and is done before copy editing). However, copy editors serving the self-publishing market especially understand that these roles are often combined these days. Your copy editor should look at overall language usage. Things like repetition – and whether a sentence scans correctly or is overly clunky – as well as eliminating errors.

Proofing
This is the final stage in the overall editorial process. After proofing, your manuscript will be locked down and the Ancient Ones will be invoked to watch over the ensuing debauchery.

You can handle proofing personally if you have an eye for errors – all that temping I did paid off! – but also remember that we can be particularly blind to mistakes in our own work.

Just make sure someone scans the text for typos, as they will surely be there, even with the best copy editor in the world. Authors can fiddle with a manuscript when it comes back from an editor, thus introducing fresh errors.

My Personal Process
If you want to dive deeper into the world of editing, and listen to me yabber on about how my own editorial and self-publishing process plays out for both fiction and non-fiction, then read my comprehensive guide to The Five Stages of Editing.

Keep in mind that my process won’t necessarily be your process. You will discover what works best for your own self-publishing enterprise over time. Just ensure, at minimum, that you:

self-edit your book until it’s as good as it possibly can be
hire a professional copy editor, incorporate the necessary changes
do your proofing until all typos and errors are eliminated.
Suggested Resources for Editing:
My post on the five stages in a proper edit is as comprehensive as it sounds. This will also help you find your own professional editor.

editorial process find an editor different types of editing book editing
And then if you want to specifically learn more about self-editing – what it consists of, why it’s not a replacement for professional editing, and how it still plays a role in self-publishing a professional book – then check out my article Self-Editing Explained.

how to self-edit, self-editing, editing your book
Aside from my own horn-tooting, I strongly recommend the book Self-Editing for Fiction Writers by Renni Browne and Dave King (and I respectfully suggest that non-fiction authors will learn a lot from it as well).

Elements of Style by Strunk & White is also a classic for a reason and should be on every author’s reading list. Even if you stray from the old-school strictures of Strunk & White when developing your own voice, it behooves you to first learn the rules. Achieve clarity and precision before spreading those wings you are so eager to flap.

3. Know Your Niche & Nail Your Branding
Time to put on your business hat; your nascent self-publishing empire shouldn’t ground to a halt while your book is being flayed by its editor. There are many things you could – and should – be doing in the meantime. Aside from writing the next book of course, which is always the most important task of all on your authorial To Do list.

However, most writers are creatively tired after a few hours in the word-mines, without necessarily being physically spent. Everyone is different with this, but I like doing my creative writing in the morning and any business, admin, research, or marketing tasks in the afternoon. Evenings, of course, are for exploring my fine collection of premium hams.

Determine Your Specific Niche
Anyway, one such business task which you should devote yourself to immediately is getting to know your niche. This isn’t an academic exercise, or speculative research for some unspecified future use. It’s necessary for self-publishers to understand the readers they are selling to.

I should stress that your particular niche is different to your overall genre, more specific. You may write under the fantasy banner, but your specific sub-genre might be grimdark epic fantasy. In the big world of romance, your niche might be contemporary romance or historical romance. And under an overall genre umbrella like thrillers, you may specifically write serial killer thrillers.

Don’t panic if these labels are unfamiliar; you will pick them up pretty quickly and only really need to be know those in your genre.

Research Your Sub-Category On Amazon
Some niches map neatly to specific sub-categories in the Kindle Store, where there are over 14,000 categories and sub-categories. You may already be aware of several such “shelves” which might be suitable for your book. If not, you must spend some time browsing around the Kindle Store on Amazon and identifying potential sub-categories. (International self-publishers: make sure to do this in the USA store – it’s the biggest market for almost any book.)

Online bookstores have distinct advantage over physical ones in that you can place your book on multiple “shelves” at once – which helps readers discover your work. But it’s important for many reasons that you only place your books where they are a good fit. (Not least because this will influence which readers Amazon recommends your work to!)

What is Packaging?
It’s important that your book looks the part, has a similar style of cover to what already sells well in the genre, that the pricing is in line with the books it will be shelved beside, and that the blurb is written in the requisite style.

This is your book’s “packaging.” The first step to putting your book in a package that will be familiar and enticing to readers is to know what is already working in your genre.

The cover for a bestselling contemporary romance tends to look very different to the cover for a bestselling historical romance. When you survey your niche, you will notice commonalities in every aspect of the book’s packaging – right down to little details like the type of fonts used and the voice that the book description is written in.

Find Commonalities In Your Niche
Familiarize yourself with your niche(s) on Amazon. Look through the Top 100 for your respective sub-categories. Make note of these commonalities, how these bestselling books are presented to readers. For bonus points, also take note of the authors who are selling well – particularly those who are aiming at the same readers.

Don’t be afraid to compare yourself to household names or mega-selling authors. This is a market research exercise, not public bragging which you might regret.

It’s not the time to be demure. If you are aiming at Nora Roberts’ readers, then note how her books are packaged.

Just don’t slavishly copy anyone. There is a big difference between recognizing that descriptions for bestselling urban fantasies tend to be written in first-person by a sassy heroine, and ripping off the branding of another author by using the exact same fonts and composition for your covers. The latter isn’t just unethical, it could also get you in legal trouble.

Suggested Resources for Branding:
Self-publishing is getting better and better at branding and positioning. Some authors are naturals and instinctively know their niche and how to express that in a book’s packaging. Others can be good at learning what’s hot in their genre but struggle more with the execution. A few can get in a tizzy with every aspect… but panic not, everyone can learn this.

I have a free course called Starting From Zero which has an entire module on exactly how you can research your niche, and then implement it as well.

free self-publishing course
Just remember to pay special attention to your cover. In fact, let’s all do that right now.

4. Design Your Cover
You may get your cover designed at an earlier point in the process. Indeed, some organized self-publishers have the cover designed first. It doesn’t matter as long as you have it in good time.

Everyone judges a book by its cover, in case that wasn’t obvious.

Your cover is often handling the critical job of that first impression with a reader. A great cover won’t usually lead to success on its own but a bad cover will surely sink you.

This is your only other expense which is pretty much non-negotiable. Unlike editing, however, there are decent options for those on a budget.

Cover Design Costs
The cost of a custom cover can be considerable – up to $500 is common, although the sky is the limit. However, it’s worth it. A great cover can do half the selling for you and will ensure that only the right readers click on your book. Whereas a poor cover will repel nearly everyone… which makes selling your book an impossible task.

Too many self-publishers skimp on editing or covers, and then waste money on marketing – which invariably fails because they didn’t invest enough in producing a professional product. A cheap or homemade cover is often a false economy. Replacing it can be an expensive lesson.

I understand the temptation to design your own cover but unless you are an experienced designer, I recommend hiring a pro.

Besides, if you can’t afford a custom cover right now, there are some excellent money-saving options.

Pre-made covers are professionally designed too, just not to your specifications. But those can be great quality too. There are many pre-made cover sites, and quality varies a lot. GoOnWrite.com is the best of the bunch. You can browse a huge selection of pre-mades, broken down by genre, from just $45.

Suggested Resources for Covers:
I have a giant article covering every aspect of book cover design which you really must read. It doesn’t just show you how to hire a pro (for a reasonable price), it goes one further again and teaches you exactly how to brief your designer so that you get the perfect cover for your story. (This is the secret sauce btw.)

It also has guidance for those on limited budgets, and those intrepid types who ignore my warnings and design their own covers anyway. By the way, this post will also help you generate the blurb for your book, and if you want to find out why I pair those two things together, well, get thee yonder.

book cover design book cover designers how to find a cover designer cover design costs
5. Lay Out Your Book To Capture Readers
Your book is finished, edited, and covered, huzzah! But you have a few more preparatory tasks before you actually publish it.

For example, you will need to format the ebook file so it displays nicely on every device. But before you can commence formatting, you need to consider your book layout.

“Boring!” you might think, and you would be right. But the decisions you make here could have a big effect on those royalty checks. Which is the very opposite of boring, if you ask money-mad me.

Optimal Book Layout
This is one area where savvy self-publishers are ahead of even the biggest publishers. And where you can get an edge on most of the competition – with just a little prep.

Experienced self-publishers know that the moment a reader finishes your book is the very best time to ask them for something. For example, to buy Book 2. Sign up to your mailing list. Review on Amazon. Maybe follow your Facebook Page, if that’s how you roll. This is something the large publishers tend to neglect, one way or another.

Those more traditionally minded publishers also tend to put in pages and pages of extraneous content at the start of an ebook – just because that’s what they have always done with print books. This kind of thinking permeates much of their approach to ebooks.

Slim Down Your Front Matter
Experienced self-publishers know that many readers will sample an ebook book before downloading. You want them to taste the meat as quickly as possible. That’s what will truly sell your book. Not how deftly you thank your ex-wife or how sincerely you express your love for Pomeranians.

Those sections like “About the Author” – which might traditionally appear at the front of a paperback – are moved to the back of an ebook by smart self-publishers. They are accessible to readers with a button-press regardless.

I’m sure you see a lot of variation in the books you read, once you know what to look for, but this is when area where you really must take your cues from successful self-publishers. We tend to have very slimmed down front matter to help convert more browsers into buyers, and spend a lot of time thinking about what kind of end matter is most effective, because that’s an even bigger marketing opportunity.

Make It Easy For Readers
Little details are important here. I remember switching from a polite request to review my book on Amazon, to one containing a clickable link to make things easier for them, and my review rate tripled overnight.

How you word phrase “upsell” will hugely influence how effective it is – this is where you dangle another book for reader to purchase, usually the next in the series. If you are shy or understated, then you won’t get readers excited and they won’t act on your suggestion right away – which is essential before your readers get distracted and move on to the next thing.

The time to capture that spark of interest is now.

If you are publishing your first book, then you won’t have anything else to sell readers but that doesn’t mean you should do nothing here. It’s absolutely critical that you use this opportunity to get readers to sign up to your mailing list – you should always be seeking to grow your mailing list, which is the most important marketing tool any author has. Asking (politely) for reviews is always smart.

Don’t waste this opportunity.

Suggested Resources on Book Layout:
My free book Following will teach you how to set-up your basic reader-capturing apparatus: your website, your mailing list, and your Facebook Page. And it will also show you how to generate content which you can share in your newsletters and social media updates, so that you can grow your following and keep readers engaged until your next release.

how to self-publish a book free self-publishing guide publish your book for free self-publishers costs self publishing advice how to
Following is only available as a sign-up bonus when you join my mailing list, and – hey! – there’s your first lesson in email marketing too: offering readers an enticing bonus is a great way to boost your mailing list.

If you sign up to my free marketing newsletter, you’ll see how all that works in real time plus you will get useful marketing advice every Friday plus you will get a copy of Following as a welcome gift. A win-win if ever there were.

Still not convinced? Hmmm. Maybe read the reviews on Goodreads?

6. Format Your MS Into A Reflowable Ebook
We’re barreling down the final stretch now so hold on to your helmets. Next we will turn that proofed manuscript into an ebook. This is a special kind of reflowable file that will magically resize and reshape itself for whatever device it is being read on… if you do it right.

If you get this wrong, you will see a massive spike in returns and a bunch of one-star reviews. So let’s avoid that.

The formatting options are so much better than when I started self-publishing ten years ago – which mostly involved crazy adventures into coding. (Reader: they weren’t so crazy.)

These days you have a number of satisfactory approaches, depending on your personal peccadilloes.

Hire a Pro
You can hire a professional formatter very cheaply and a full-length book can cost you less than $100. This is the easiest option obviously, but not without its downsides.

If you are just outsourcing then you won’t have the ability to make any changes yourself. Some recommended formatting services like BBeBooks will fix a number of typos for you at no extra charge though.

Use a Tool
There are a number of excellent formatting tools for self-publishers these days, many of which are free. And there even more terrible ones, so perhaps stick closely to my recommendations here. A bad tool can introduce errors to your book file, which you might only be aware of when the one-star reviews come rolling in.

If you are already using Scrivener, that does a reasonable job of turning out ebooks. Vellum is the #1 tool for creating ebook files, but is Mac-only, and not the cheapest anyway. Free options include the formatting tools at Reedsy and Draft2Digital.

Downsides of this approach are that it takes a little more of your time than outsourcing. Also, some of the tools (like Vellum) can turn out very similar looking ebooks – certainly I can always spot a Vellum book as a reader. (Although that’s not such a bad thing, to be honest – Vellum books usually look pretty neat.)

You might be a little more limited in how much you can customize your ebook, however.

Code it Yourself
The downsides need to be flagged up front here; this option is not for the faint-hearted. You will need to be at least somewhat tech savvy, and have lots and lots of patience. But if you are willing to spend the time – i.e. to learn how to code your own ebook in a HTML formatter – then you will be able to format your own books in a jiffy, fix any errors whenever you like, customize the look if your ebook any which way, and also potentially develop a skill to help finance your self-publishing business as well.

Plenty of self-publishers have a side-gig as an editor or cover designer or formatter – especially at the start. If you don’t mind getting your hands dirty, check out my free guide to formatting your own ebooks.

Suggest Resources on Ebook Formatting
BBeBooks is my go-to formatter. I do my own ebooks, but Paul Salvette does all my print books. He also formats the ebooks for many fellow authors who highly recommended him. And if you want even more formatting service recommendations, check out my free guide Let’s Get Digital – which has all sorts of recommended providers: editors, designers, formatters, and more.

Vellum is everyone’s preferred automated tool for formatting ebooks. Well, everyone that owns a Mac. Us plebs with PCs are out of luck. Some use Scrivener – which is a word processor but has a reasonable ebook export function. Others use free tools like the formatter from Draft2Digital.

But hey, want to code your own ebook and make sure it looks exactly how you want and is 100% error-free? You can totally do that. I do that! Here’s my guide to formatting your own ebooks. Warning: only for the technically minded. And the patient. On the plus side, you learn a new skill.

ebook formatting, how to format an ebook, kindle formatting
7. Decide Your Price
You have everything needed to begin uploading the various retailers, but I recommend a couple more bits of preparation first. Because you will be asked to make some important decisions during the process, which can throw you for a loop.

Pricing is one of the biggest, and one of the areas where newer authors can have the biggest misconceptions. Self-publishing and ebooks have turned pricing on its head. Nowhere is the gap between self-publishers and traditional publishers more stark than when it comes to book prices.

Self-publishing often views price as a lever, whereas traditional publishers use ebook pricing as a bulwark – aiming to slow the transition to digital and protect the print market. Self-publishers must realise that a huge amount of nonsense about pricing flows from the desire of traditional publishers to make ebooks less attractive to readers.

On the author level, the most common misconception is to confuse price and value, and to make the mistake of thinking that the price you attach to your book either reflects or influences that value. Whereas experienced self-publishers view pricing as a marketing tool.

Those who have published a few books know that the price on the book cover is not so important as the money the book is bringing in, and they will tend to choose the price that will make them the most money – it’s often that simple.

Look to Your Genre
The other main consideration here is your genre. There can be a wide variance in price depending on the kind of book you write. Romance novels can be far cheaper than a business book, for example, so make sure you are within the normal range for your niche.

And make sure that you are pricing like self-publishers, rather than big traditional publishers. They aren’t seeking to maximize income from ebooks, like you are – they are often more concerned about protecting their print sales, as mentioned, and will artificially price ebooks higher as a result. Copy them and your sales will suffer.

Don’t price too low though. You need to leave room for yourself to run the occasional price promotion. Leading off with a bargain basement price won’t give you much wriggle room.

One last thing: when surveying your niche, be careful to parse out experienced authors who might be doing something aggressive like a 99c launch. They are deploying a specific strategy involving multiple books, which you can ignore for now.

If in doubt, a price of $2.99-$4.99 won’t see you far wrong, and will ensure you get the highest royalty rates on all retailers.

Suggested Resources on Pricing:
I have a longer digression on ebook pricing you can read. I especially recommend perusing that if you are reticent to price cheaply or run promotions. Or if you have ever used the phrase, “I should get paid more for my book than people spend on a coffee.” (Sorry for picking on you like that, but this is important!)

If you’re skeptical, here’s a taste: “Price is not a hill to die on, but a powerful tool for levering your books into the charts, rewarding fans, generating buzz, and expanding your audience.” Well said, says I. (About me.)

ebook pricing
8. Optimize Your Metadata
Metadata can be a scary word to normies, but it just means little pieces of information that you attach to your book when self-publishing it. See? Not so freaky after all.

It’s basically just some fields you fill out when uploading – nothing to fear. And these bits of information are things you will be familiar with (one hopes!) like your name and your book’s title. Others you might be less familiar with include categories and keywords – and these are the really important bits of metadata you should particularly focus on.

Collating Your Metadata
If you followed my recommendations above on knowing your niche, you will have made a head start on the category front. And if you read my monster post on cover design, you will be already lapping the ne’er do wells who skipped over it. But keywords might be a bit trickier for you.

I don’t know how far down the geekhole you want to go on this topic – I have a book called Amazon Decoded which gets pretty far down there in places, for those so inclined. However, I can also give you the quick-and-dirty version right here, because I’m good like that.

Categories
You can only pick two categories when uploading – from a rather limited menu. But you can add a lot more later (up to ten ebook and print book categories, in fact), so be thorough in your research now.

Go through all those hilariously niche sub-categories on the Kindle Store which we mentioned earlier. And find as many suitable homes for your book as possible. Just keep it all relevant. Don’t throw your book in anywhere it looks out of place; that will hurt you long term.

Keywords
Head over to Amazon.com and start a-searching. Type in things that you think readers might enter when searching for books like yours. Amazon will helpfully suggest common searches to you as you start typing. Draw up a list of potential keywords and then whittle it down to the seven most promising.

You can easily change this stuff after publishing so don’t sweat it too much. Non-fiction authors might want to spend a bit more time on their keywords; non-fiction readers use the search box more than their fiction friends.

Note that you need seven keyword strings. Each string can be made up of multiple words, with a cap of fifty characters on each. On Amazon anyway. Other retailers vary a little.

Suggest Resources on Metadata:
I have a video over at my fancy new YouTube channel which breaks down categories for you. Come for the mustache, stay for the beard, as they say. (Note: they do not say this.)


As for the krazy world of keywords, the description of the above video will give you a bunch of resources to explore.

Finally, for the ubergeeks who want to get deep – so deep! – into the overall world of metadata, how the Kindle Store works, Amazon’s famous bookselling algorithms, and how you can use all that secret knowledge to sell lots of books, well, I got you covered.

how to self-publish a book free self-publishing guide publish your book for free self-publishers costs self publishing advice how to
9. Distribute Your Book
Warning: this is nowhere near as straightforward as you might assume.

There are lots of places where you could sell your book but Amazon has a curveball with your penname on it. Welcome to one final area of self-publishing where it pays to be prepared before you press that big red button (it’s actually orange but whatever).

Always Publish Direct to Amazon
Self-publishing on Amazon is a no-brainer. You should always publish direct to Amazon – i.e. without using a middleman – as it has the most readers, by far. It’s also the easiest marketplace to gain traction, in a happy act of serendipity.

If you want to dig into all the nuts and bolts of publishing on Amazon, check out my free self-publishing guide Let’s Get Digital. But the highlights are:

no upfront fees
a 70% royalty rate for most sales
global reach
payment 2-3 months after a sale is made
publish print and audio editions
access to an advertising platform.
Saying yes to all that is a very easy decision but then things get complicated.

Amazon Exclusivity
When uploading to Kindle Direct Publishing (KDP) you get offered a few treats to entice you into make your book exclusive to Amazon; it’s not an easy choice.

In fact, enrolling in KDP Select – the name of the program which requires exclusivity – is still a matter of hot debate almost ten years since it was introduced. You may have seen authors debating whether to be “wide” or “exclusive” and this is what they’re referring to. (Now you know.)

Even experienced authors who know the business inside out can go back-and-forth on KDP Select and many will simply try it both ways and see which works best. That’s a viable approach, by the way, as you only commit to Amazon exclusivity for 90 days at a time and decide on a book-by-book basis.

Pros and Cons of KDP Select
There are so many nuances to this decision that an entire chapter of my free self-publishing guide Let’s Get Digital is devoted to breaking down all the different scenarios. It is a very individual decision, so spend a bit of time weighing the pros and cons – they are quite clearly defined but you must decide for yourself.

In short, the two primary advantages of enrolling in KDP Select are access to a pair of tasty promotional tools which make it a bit easier to reach readers, and then entrance to the Kindle Unlimited program – which is Amazon’s Netflix for books, in case you have been so deep in the writing cave you haven’t heard of the biggest disruption to book publishing since the last time Amazon turned the business upside down.

Some authors love it, others despise it. I would say that it’s complicated but that would be lowballing things by a ridiculous degree. See Let’s Get Digital for a lot more on all that, if you’re curious.

Going Wide: Outside the World of Amazon
If you resist Amazon’s siren call of exclusivity, there are at least four more retailers you will want to list with:

Apple Books
Barnes & Noble Press
Kobo Writing Life
Google Play
Note that Amazon has around three quarters of the market, and Apple is probably a good bit bigger than the rest combined. Yes, Google is a pipsqueak – at least in ebook terms. More stores than that exist, but they control miniscule slivers of the market.

You have the option of going direct with all those retailers. There are some advantages to doing so, including getting paid a little more. All these retailers have broadly similar terms to Amazon but check out Let’s Get Digital for the finer points.

Using a Distributor
Using a distributor is a sensible alternative if you wish to simplify your life. While going direct to Amazon is an imperative, using a distributor to reach the rest is a common choice.

There are a small number of reputable distributors and my strong recommendation is Draft2Digital. It will distribute your book to Apple, Barnes & Noble, Kobo, and a whole host of smaller retailers.

Draft2Digital also serves some subscription services like Scribd, and enables library sales as well. You can do all that with one upload, rather than having to deal with each store separately, which is quite the timesaver. All this will cost you about 10% of your royalties.

Smashwords is a legitimate alternative if you wish to explore other options.

Completists may wish to upload to Draft2Digital – even if they are already going direct with the other retailers. Library sales and Scribd can make this extra step worthwhile. Just note that you must go direct to Google Play regardless; they don’t work with distributors.

Suggested Resources for Distribution:
Kindle Direct Publishing will get your book on Amazon stores worldwide, and has lots of info on the platform. Apple Books For Authors is your port-of-call for Apple. Barnes & Noble Press is what will do the same for America’s largest bookstore chain. Kobo Writing Life will publishing you on Kobo, which is the biggest player in Canada and has grabbed a chunk of some interesting global markets. Finally, Google Play Books Partner Centre is the snappy name for the portal which will get you onto the smallest ebookstore on the biggest search engine in the world.

And then if you want to explore my recommended distributor, that’s Draft2Digital.

You can spend hours combing the help pages above to get all the information you will need on ebook formats and cover file sizes and royalty rates and payment terms – hey, it’s a free world! – but if you want a handy side-by-side comparison of everything, then Let’s Get Digital will see you right.

As for the slightly important step of actually publishing the darn thing, I have a video guide for you which walks you through the process step-by-step for KDP, explaining what to put in all those fields – so many fields! Yegads. The other retailers are all different, but similar enough that once you figure out Amazon you should be able to handle the rest yourself.


10. Create A Marketing Plan
Barely has your celebratory prosecco been quaffed when you come to the awful realization that there is more work ahead of you yet. Even if you diligently followed all the other steps and truly did publish your book like a pro, you know have to sell the blighter. And doing that involves getting noticed in a pile of eight million others.

Come back! Come back! I have solutions. I just wanted to impress upon you the scale of the challenge so you don’t start slacking now that you are a Fancy Pants Published Author.

Selling books is totally doable, thousands and thousands of us do it every day, and we all started from zero. Keep that in mind when encountering the inevitable frustrations which lie ahead.

Divesting Yourself of Marketing Myths
First step here is basically deprogramming yourself. Your head is, most likely, full of all sorts of gunk about how to sell books which is utterly, utterly false – or perhaps pertains to a world of print and traditionally published books, where self-publishers will normally sell almost everything online, and an overwhelming majority of sales will be ebooks.

Forget about:

book signings
pressing the flesh
talk shows
radio interviews
media attention
blogging
tweeting incessantly about your book, or
hiring a PR whizzkid – even if you have money to burn.
“What’s left?” you might reasonably ask… in a slightly despairing manner. Well, plenty.

And none if it involves donning a pimp suit, harassing people into purchasing, spamming, engaging in any kind of deceptiveness, or even entering meatspace – should that be the kind of body horror you routinely recoil from even in normal times.

Good news, right?

What Really Sells Books
What we actually do to sell books is a little more prosaic: we run price promotions and free promotions. We have newsletters for our readers and websites about our books. We spend a little bit of money on Groupon-style sites to highlight those deals. And… that’s it really, to begin with.

Later on, when you have more books and experience and royalty checks to spend, things will get more complicated – oh so complicated! – and you may get deep into any or all of branding, advertising, box sets, list swaps, group promotions, series deals, launch strategies, algorithms, and all sorts.

It’s a whole world, really, and you can choose your marketing poison when and how you like.

But those reassurances don’t make the prospect of marketing any less daunting to most authors. I was totally cheating myself. I have a marketing background and used to work for a tech giant – which is quite the twofer given the skills you need as a self-publisher these days. However, I understand how incomprehensible digital marketing can seem to many writers.

Building A Marketing Campaign
Self-publishing is all about sharing knowledge and paying it forward – that’s how I got my start. To help everyone get to grips with book marketing, I have created a free course called Starting From Zero.

It’s pretty extensive and covers everything an author needs to know when building their audience and finding their first readers. And it really is free! There’s no catch, no bait-and-switch, and I’m not trying to sell you anything else either – even the two coursebooks are free as well.

Enroll here today and talk the course at your own pace. Let me give you fair warning though: just because it’s free, that doesn’t mean you won’t have to work. I’m pretty serious about that part. Self-publishing like a pro takes time and effort. Don’t expect shortcuts or gimmicks or magic tricks.

free self-publishing course
But I will give you a very effective method for selling books, and show you how to create your own marketingplan. A career plan, even.

How To Get Reviews
If you are thinking that having a bunch of positive reviews on your book will help with the selling part, well, you would be right on the money. Here’s how to get them as a self-publisher, without spending a penny. I apologize in advance for Peak Lockdown Beard.


[Bonus] Build Your Author Platform
“And that’s not all,” he said with a ridiculous flourish. Some of the most critical marketing tasks actually take place before you self-publish your book. And I’m not talking about anything intangible (or questionable) like “building buzz.”

You might have heard the phrase author platform but I’m also guessing you didn’t hear it defined very precisely – or at all, I’m betting. I have a short, free book which will teach you what a real author platform is, why having one is so crucial to success in self-publishing, and – best of all – exactly how to build your own author platform.

Free Step-by-Step Guide to Platform Building
Following also tells you what you can skip too – surely a relief after this firehose of information. It boils platform building down to the truly effective essentials: a website, a newsletter, and a Facebook Page. (And you can even ditch the latter if you are really squeezed for time.)

It goes through the mechanics of building all that step-by-step, and show you how to grow your platform in a sustainable way – a platform that actually sells books.

how to self-publish a book free self-publishing guide publish your book for free self-publishers costs self publishing advice how to
Sign up here to get your free copy of Following. And see you in the charts, compadre.

Your Questions On Self-Publishing
Unfortunately, I get far too many emails these days to respond to everyone – it would be the full time job of several someones – but I do want to help as many people as possible.

-------------

15 Rules For Advertising Books
Updated by David Gaughran 12 March 2026. Marketing • 12 Comments.

I started working in digital advertising over twenty years ago and while it is tricky to generalize about three very different ad platforms – Facebook, Amazon, and BookBub Ads – there are some general rules that I recommend everyone considers, before losing their shirts on book advertising.

Not least because books present a pretty unique marketing challenge when compare to generic products. Something which can surprise marketers who move into publishing.

Make sure to check the end of this post for some free book advertising help. I’ve got lots of resources for you to help with Amazon Ads, Facebook Ads, and BookBub Ads. Whether you are a beginner or more experienced, you will find something useful!

Rule #1: Don’t spend what you can’t afford
I mean it: don’t spend what you can’t afford. Experienced advertisers may look at this a little differently. But when you are starting out with ads, the old gambler’s rule should apply, i.e. only spend what you can afford to lose.

Certainly don’t borrow money for an ad campaign. That’s putting incredible pressure on yourself and multiplies the chances of a terrible outcome. Consider rolling your book profits back into marketing instead. It’s a nice, organic, and sustainable way to grow your business. And whether you have a lot to spend, or a little… start small.

Only increase your budgets when you are sure the ads are working. Ad by that I mean selling books, rather than generating traffic or hoovering up Likes; not all Likers blossom into lovers, alas.

When you are more experienced – i.e. when you have tried-and-tested targeting and you already know that your ad assets convert – you can start campaigns off much hotter from the get-go. But you can’t shortcut that process when starting out without taking huge and unnecessary risks.

Rule #2: do explore the wider world of marketing first
It’s really wise to explore other paths to readers before deciding advertising is the most suitable. Advertising sounds sexy… when it’s really tiresome number crunching for the most part. Or epic frustration as you spend hours wrestling with technical issues. And/or a boring slog learning how the systems work.

Book advertising is also a massive time-sink as well as a real money-pit. A whole legion of course sellers and tool floggers might claim that advertising is the cure for all your ills. But remember that it’s only one part of the big world of marketing. Other approaches may work better for you, especially when you’re starting out or your budget is restricted.

I especially recommend that beginners (and anyone on a budget) pay attention to the world of deal sites. It’s often the cheapest clicks you’ll get anywhere and no specialist knowledge is required.

Best Book Promo Sites 2026 Promotion promote a book
Rule #3: don’t blindly take advice from anyone
This is a good approach generally and especially important in the world of advertising. Everyone’s ad knowledge is built on constantly shifting sands and is heavily skewed by their own personal experiences. Question everything and everyone, and don’t blindly take advice from any source.

I’ve been working in online advertising on and off for enearly twenty years now and I’m still frequently wrong, or just stumped, or catch myself acting under any number of cognitive biases. And I might not realize until after the fact.

For all the talk in advertising of data and spreadsheets and testing, it’s a deeply pseudoscientific world. Data is cherry picked. Theory becomes best practice and then dogma, without being subjected to nearly enough scrutiny.

Most advertisers are chasing results above all, rather than scientific rigor, so that’s understandable. Just keep in mind that things are never as “objective” or as “proven” as they seem, even when everyone is experienced and has the best intentions. And that’s before we get to all the bluffers and schemers that advertising attracts.

Rule #4: do survey the field before making your choice
Definitely do take a look at each of the three major ad platforms before deciding where to spend all your book advertising dollars: Amazon, BookBub, and Facebook. Play with each of them a little. Dip your toe into some resources and get a feel for what works where. Look at the strengths and weaknesses of each platform – because they are wildly different in so many ways.

Go deeper again, if you want my advice, and check your comp authors on each platform are viable targets. Because one of your key authors might not be targetable at all on Facebook but might have a healthy following on BookBub. Or they might have no followers on BookBub. Or might be too expensive to target on Amazon.

Time invested researching these things is often money saved on bad ads.

Rule #5: don’t ask this question
Please, I beg you, don’t ask “which ad platform is hot right now?” They’re all hot if you know what you’re doing and they’re all not if you don’t.

Rule #6: do focus your dollars on one platform
All of the ad platforms are challenging enough to master… when you focus on them. Trying to make headway with all of them at once is going to melt your brain. While the fundamentals of digital advertising can often stay the same, how that plays out in terms of best practices on each platform can be utterly different.

Learn each platform individually, and in turn, and approach each platform as a distinct problem to be solved. Besides, mastering one platform is often more than sufficient. Getting a handle on two is just gravy. (I’m not sure I know anyone who is excellent at all three, by the way.)

Finally, stick to the three platforms of Amazon, BookBub, and Facebook. There’s always who’s sure they’re about to crack Twitter or Pinterest or Google. I’ve been hearing that for years and I’m still waiting…

Rule #7: don’t sweat it if you struggle
You really shouldn’t get too disheartened if you can’t crack one particular platform. Move on to another, it might be more your speed. I was able to master BookBub Ads relatively quickly. Facebook took me a lot longer despite having far more resources at my fingertips. And I’ve never been able to fully crack Amazon Ads – despite being on fairly intimate terms with the Amazon algorithms for some time now.

You don’t always know what will work in advance; you might need to play the field a little before finding your perfect match.

Rule #8: do be careful of generic tips
I strongly recommend that you seek out specific best practices for book advertising rather then simply applying generic advice. As someone with a general marketing background, I can tell you that books are… weird.

We are selling super cheap products with tight margins where the customers are uber-picky and have the most bizarrely niche tastes and we are competing in a marketplace with maybe 1m suppliers and over 8m products. Yikes.

(It’s quite the marketing challenge btw, so don’t feel bad if you are struggling with it.)

Anyway, my point is that general advertising advice can sometimes lead you astray. I personally love some outside resources, but I also have the experience to parse what will and what won’t work for books. (Jon Loomer for Facebook ads is great, for example.) If you do venture beyond the Pale, keep this caution in mind – certainly with Facebook Ads, and to a lesser extent with Amazon Ads.

Rule #9: don’t listen to obvious nonsense from shovel sellers
It’s really important not to listen to obvious BS from people with something to sell. I hear people saying things like “Amazon is just pay-to-play now” or “Facebook has completely throttled organic reach.”

Neither of those things are true, as a simple glance at your inbox or newsfeed should show you, which will be filled with Amazon recommendation emails and organic Facebook updates respectively. I can get still get excellent organic reach with my Facebook Page. It’s harder than it was – it takes work to keep the content focused and engaging – but it is doable. And Amazon makes millions of organic book recommendations every single day by email and in various locations all over its site, which drive millions of book purchases.

Ignore anyone saying otherwise – such things usually originate with (surprise!) someone selling a course or tool which “solves” the “problem.” 

Rule #10: do befriend the algos
It’s important to figure out how organic visibility works on Facebook and Amazon. Organic visibility is not only a potential alternative to advertising, it’s also something that will massively augment the ROI you get from your advertising efforts.

If you know what makes content enticing and share-worthy on Facebook, you can bake that into your ads as well. And if you know what triggers Amazon’s recommendation engine, you can bake that into your marketing campaigns too.

Rule #11: don’t rush
The people who really need to hear this probably skipped over the headline so let me repeat it. Don’t be in rush. Set your expectations appropriately. Save up a budget for learning the platform. Learn the fundamentals. Understand how the system works. And take your time on these critical steps before rolling your ads out.

Spend significant time ensuring that the product is in good shape (that’s your book). Ensure your ad assets are in fine fettle (your ad text and image, where appropriate). And be as certain as you can be that you are pointing these things at the right people and that the ensemble you have put together in terms of the product and its packaging and your ad assets are all screaming “This is the kind of book you love” to all those readers you’re aiming at.

Rule #12: do spend a lot of time on your landing page
Make sure to focus a lot of attention on optimizing your landing page. Whether you advertise on Amazon, BookBub, or Facebook you will, most likely, be pointing your ads direct to your listings on Amazon (or elsewhere). Conversion is the most critical variable in advertising and probably the most under-discussed.

The experience that readers have when arriving on your book’s page will close the sale or drive them away. Everything must be in harmony, working towards that goal: your cover, price, title, blurb, sample.

Authors invariably waste dozens of hours in the advertising weeds when the real problem was on their book’s page. If the traffic you are sending to your book’s page is good quality – i.e. the right readers – then the problem is invariably with your landing page.

While we are on the topic of conversion, Amazon is better at closing the sale than any other retailer. It has crunched a gajillion data points and iterated its sales pages endlessly. Which means you should probably start off just pointing ads to Amazon before trying to solve the harder problem of selling at other retailers (or direct sales).

Ignore that advice if you wish – as with any advice that doesn’t work for you. But perhaps keep it in mind if you struggle to get ads to convert outside the Bezosverse. Perhaps there are more fundamental issues you need to solve before attempting more difficult advertising challenges. (Same goes for advertising full price books over deals, btw).

Rule #13: don’t forget about genre variances
Not all best practices are universal across every single book niche, and that’s especially true when it comes to advertising your books. Yet another good reason to test everything at a lower level before making bigger bets.

Rule #14: do remember that common problems have solutions
Most common problems have well-established solutions – at least in a meta sense. For example, if your ads aren’t getting enough impressions, it’s usually an issue with bids (or maybe budget). If your ads are getting impressions but no clicks, it’s usually a problem with your ads themselves (targeting, image, or text). And if you are getting clicks but no sales, then it’s usually a problem with your landing page.

These are all just rules of thumb, but they have endured since I started in online advertising in 2004 – holding up remarkably well across different platforms too. It might not be right 100% of the time, but it’s true often enough to be useful.

Book advertising is now different in this respect and approaching things with this general framework should – at the very least – save you precious time when trying to diagnose issues with our ads.

Rule #15: don’t let it happen in Vegas
It’s really important not to succumb to gambler’s fallacy – a fallacy so powerful that it’s hard to avoid even when you are acutely aware of it.

Whole cities have risen from the desert because of this, bankrolled by our desperation to dig ourselves out of a hole, by digging in the same spot which dug the hole in the first place. Another $100 isn’t going to flip an ad from bad to good. Please note this fallacy is easier to avoid if you follow Rule #1.

Want More Help With Book Advertising?
My newsletter subscribers enjoy an entire trove of free Facebook Ads resources guiding them through every aspect of the platform – including all the lastest changes.

This is just one of the perks that my mailing list subscribers receive – all for free. We also get into topics like building a killer email list and everything else under the sun that pertains to building audience and reaching readers.

Sign up to my list, you get access to all the best emails you missed, as well as sneak previews of upcoming books (meaning you get the jump on the latest tricks strategies of everyone else), and exclusive discounts too.

You also get a FREE copy of Following – a book that you can’t get anywhere else! I strongly recommend that you join twenty thousand authors and sign up today.


-------------------


These Amazon Category Hacks Can Boost Your Book Sales
Updated by David Gaughran 9 May 2021. Amazon, Publishing • 40 Comments.

Choosing the right Amazon categories for your book is such an important factor in your success. Being smart here can greatly increase your visibility, making your work more likely to be discovered, purchased, and recommended.

But if you make bad decisions here – or opt to do nothing at all – you can limit your book’s success. Sometimes you can even nudge Amazon towards recommend your book to all the wrong people! Which invariably fails, of course, and causes Amazon to think you have written a dud. Meaning Amazon is less likely to recommend your book at all. This is something you really want to avoid.

You should revisit your book’s categories on a regular basis. Not just to ensure you are maximizing visibility, but to check Amazon hasn’t placed you in a bad category. You need to know exactly which categories and sub-categories your book is in. (Amazon doesn’t make that part easy.) And then keep on top of changes to the category system as well.

The advice in this comprehensive guide draws from a book I wrote called Amazon Decoded. This book is the culmination of years of research. It breaks down exactly how the Kindle Store works, how you can design marketing plans which seduce the algorithms instead of fighting them, and the exact ways you need to tweak your metadata to get the biggest halo from every promotion you run.

I’m going to tap into that research today to explain exactly how you can get Amazon’s category system working for your book, instead of against it.

Here, you will learn why the Kindle Store is broken down into so many categories (and the massive opportunity this presents). How you only get access to a limited menu in KDP. The ways you can expand the number of categories for your book to 10 specific sub-categories – and more! Why it’s important to only place your book in relevant categories. And how you can remove your book from bad categories (and why that is important).

Yegads, that’s a lot – we might need a Table of Contents! Use this if you wish to skip ahead, but I strongly recommend reading the sections on relevance and bad categories. You might have the power now to add all sorts of categories to your books. However, use this power wisely or it could really backfire. I mean it! Read on for more on that and everything else…

The Power of Visibility on Amazon
Limited Category Menu When Publishing
How To Add Up To 10 Categories To Your Book
Adding Even More Categories For Print & International
How To Check What Categories Your Book Is In
Avoiding Bad Categories
The Importance of Relevance
Researching Your Ideal Categories
Your Action Plan: Category Optimization Checklist
The Power of Visibility on Amazon
Amazon sells a staggering array of products – around 350m at the last estimate. A beefy taxonomy is needed to classify everything. Shoppers need assistance finding what they are looking for. And Amazon’s data-hungry algorithms need assistance classifying everything appropriately. Primarily so it knows exactly what to recommend to each individual customer.

You can read a full breakdown of how Amazon recommendations work if you like. But what is most immediately relevant is the sheer size of the book category system… and the enormous value you can wring from it.

The Kindle Category System
There are over 8 million books in the Kindle Store. But it’s not just the number of books being published which has swelled; Amazon has been watching reader tastes become increasingly niche since the Kindle Store opened in 2007.

To make it much easier for these increasingly picky readers to find the specific type of books they prefer, Amazon now has 14,000 categories and sub-categories – just for books! Some of these are incredibly broad categories like Fantasy. Others are much more niche like Paranormal Romance featuring Demons & Devils.

Amazon calls these “Browse Categories,” and that name gives a hint at their value to authors – because readers really do browse these categories looking for books fresh to read.

While the Top 100 of the Kindle Store is probably out of reach for most authors, it’s important to note that each of these 14,000+ sub-categories has its own Top 100 Best Seller list – for both free and paid books – which gives authors a considerable opportunity for visibility. An appropriately sized pool for every book to play in, if you like.

Not only that, but many of the recommendations that Amazon makes to readers are category-based. You will not be eligible for them unless you are in that exact sub-category.

If authors are smart about their metadata, do their research, and add more relevant sub-categories to their books – and I’ll show you exactly how to that in a moment – they can exponentially increase their visibility on Amazon.

By adding more categories you instantly become eligible for a whole new swathe of bestseller lists and Amazon recommendation emails. This increased visibility will also add a a considerable halo every single time you have a sales spike, making every launch more profitable and every backlist promotion your run more lucrative.

Bootstrap Your Way To The Top
This is your prize: more sales, money, and visibility. As well as greatly increased likelihood that readers will organically discover your work and also that Amazon will recommend your work to readers as well.

This isn’t just an extra dollop of cream for the cats at the top table either. Because each category has its own Best Seller lists and associated customer recommendations, Amazon’s category system helps books bootstrap themselves to success, giving each book and author a smaller pool to shine in before tackling the bigger fish elsewhere.

But you will only benefit from Amazon’s category system if you make the right choices. Some of these niche Best Seller lists might not receive anything like the traffic of the bigger categories. But the competition is often much less fierce, allowing smaller books and authors to gain momentum… if they take the trouble to research appropriate categories.

It takes a little bit of time, and a touch of fiddling, but it’s all in the set-up. Once you have optimized your book’s categories, you don’t have to mess with it again – aside from checking in every year or two, perhaps, to see if anything should be tweaked.

There’s Just One Problem
When you first self-publish on Amazon, you are given a choice of just two categories from a very limited menu. This is often missing the specific sub-categories where you wish to place your book.

You may have noticed your book appearing in some of these sub-categories, even though you didn’t explicitly choose them. Perhaps you also appeared in some sub-categories you would rather you didn’t.

How do you get into all the categories you truly want? Which categories are good for your books and which should be avoided? What can you do to remove your book from inappropriate categories? And where can you find out which categories your books are in right now? (And why does Amazon make this so bloody convoluted!?!?)

Let’s break it all down.

Limited Category Menu When Publishing
Amazon’s category system might seem higgledy piggledy. But this is more a product of something being gradually added to over a long period of time, rather than designed by a drunk person.

The publishing interface on Amazon gives us little idea of the full power of the category system. We can only choose two categories when uploading our books. Not only that, it’s a very restricted list of categories – often containing rather broad choices like “Historical Fiction.” For some reason, Amazon doesn’t always let you drill down to the exact sub-category you want. For example, “Medieval Historical Fiction” is a category in the Kindle Store, but is not selectable when publishing your book.

Blame It On The BISAC
It’s not exactly clear why Amazon makes it so complicated. This list appears to be a legacy system as it is based on industry standard (BISAC) codes. Indeed, you may have noticed that this limited menu bears much more relation to the category choices on other retailers than it does to the actual category breakdown in the Kindle Store. Well, this is why.

We can grouse about such quirks but it’s important to recognize they present a big, fat opportunity as well. Most publishers and authors will pick two broad-ish categories from that list… and then leave it at that.

Whereas savvy self-publishers know there is a way to add many more very specific sub-categories that aren’t immediately selectable. Hello, secret menu items! And also ways to avoid bad categories, boost your paperbacks, and then tailor all that for different international markets as well.

How To Add Up To 10 Categories To Your Book
The method for adding additional categories used to be quite confusing – and it was never quite clear precisely how many categories you were allowed. Amazon has now streamlined all this considerably and the situation is much more straightforward.

You are permitted to place your book in up to 10 categories and sub-categories. To get the exact categories you want, you simply need to contact Amazon using the process below. It’s that simple.

All that messing around with keywords to get into certain categories is no longer necessary. (That system looks like it is being phased out by Amazon anyway.) However, that old keyword-category system can still cause authors issues, so we’ll return to look at it in a moment.

Step-by-Step Method of Adding Categories
For now, here’s the new, up-to-date process for adding categories to your books – fully Amazon-approved!

Identify the full category path for each of your preferred sub-categories. By this I mean actually write out Kindle eBooks > Mysteries, Thriller & Suspense > Thrillers > Political for each of your target categories, rather than just Political Thrillers – you will need this in a moment. (And if you need help researching the ideal target categories for your book, I have you covered below.)
Log in to your KDP account. Click the Help link in the top right, then the Contact Us button in the bottom left of that page (they don’t make it so easy to find). This is the direct link, if you are having trouble.
Underneath “How Can We Help?” select the first option “Amazon product page” and then “Update Amazon Categories” right underneath.
An email template will appear. Add in the ASIN for your book, and then the full category path for each category you want added. There’s some research tips at the end if you are stuck.
Ignore the section on removing categories… unless you have bad categories that you wish your book to be removed from – more on this too in a moment.
Click “Send message” and Amazon should sort this out for you in a couple of days. Note: depending on where you are in the world and what time of day it is, you may have the option of doing this by phone – it doesn’t matter which way you do it. Phone tends to be faster, but don’t expect the changes to be instant. They might still take a day or two to process fully.
With Great Power Comes Great Responsibility
Just remember the most important thing: always keep it relevant. I’m serious about this. Don’t brush it off!

You don’t have to use all ten categories if you can’t find many appropriate ones. You need to be sure that your book is a natural fit for the categories you pick. A murder doesn’t make something a mystery and some light banging doesn’t make it a romance.

In fact, as you will learn in a moment, putting your book into categories where it doesn’t naturally fit might look like a quick-and-dirty way to pilfer some extra visibility (or to pluck a low-hanging Best Seller tag), but this can hurt you.

And it might attract Amazon’s attention – the bad kind of attention.

I hope I have attached enough warning signs to this idea, but let me say it one last time. You have the power to put your book into ten categories, but that doesn’t necessarily mean you should use it.

Now let’s look at how you can further expand visibility for your print books, and internationally, so we can mix some sunshine in with this pesky parade-rain.

Adding Categories For Print & International
The situation regarding print editions has been clarified too. Amazon says you are permitted up to 10 Kindle categories and 10 Book categories for each book – the latter being the category system which houses print editions and audiobooks as well.

This is where you can really gain an edge. While authors are starting to get to grips with the new category allowances for ebooks, most haven’t yet realized they can do the same with their paperbacks too – or that they can run through this process internationally also.

That’s right! You can – and should – repeat this process for each international market which is important to you.

In case you didn’t notice, the Kindle Store is broken down quite differently in each international market. I guarantee you that even if you have ten excellently chosen sub-categories for your work on Amazon USA, not all of those will be replicated in your UK, Canadian, or Australian editions, let alone non-English markets. So take the time to peruse the Kindle Store breakdown in territories which are important to you.

It’s completely up to you how many markets you want to repeat this process for. Just note that the benefits probably approach zero in the smaller, non-English-language markets. You should consider doing it for your primary print editions and your UK ebooks at the very least. However, those with foreign language editions should pay attention to the local language market for those books.

How To Check What Categories You Are In
“But wait,” you might have said multiple times during this article. “How can I find out what categories I am in?”

It’s a fair question, ever since Amazon stopped appending that information to every book page, much to the chagrin of metadata mavens and snoopers everywhere.

Officially, Amazon says that the only way you can find out which categories you are in is by emailing them and asking. However, there are unofficial ways – better ways.

Recommended Tools For Category Snooping
If you already have Publisher Rocket (affiliate link), then you can use that to see what categories you are in. You can also check out any other book that catches your eye, for that matter. Or the level of competition in each category, how many sales you might need to hit the charts, and so on. The main feature of Publisher Rocket surrounds keywords. I’ve found it very helpful in identifying good keywords for my books, and just for generally understanding how readers use Search on Amazon. (I was genuinely surprised by the terms they use – it’s far different from Google.) It costs $97, but there is a 60-day moneyback guarantee if you don’t find it useful.

However, if you want a free option, then I strongly recommend bklnk.com. I use it all the time and recommend it. You can get results for any Kindle book or print books, and for the USA, UK, and Canada as well. Super handy.

Avoiding Bad Categories
You can end up in “bad” categories in two ways: either by accident or by choice. Let’s deal with the accidental cases first before whipping out our wagging finger.

The old system for getting into various sub-categories involved choosing certain keyword triggers (authors often called these “keyword categories”) from a list doled out by KDP. There were three major problems with this system. First, the list was inaccurate and incomplete and authors often had to guess at the keyword trigger. Second, this system used up valuable keyword space unnecessarily. Third, it often resulted in authors placing their books into inappropriate categories – completely by accident.

The keyword triggers Amazon selected were pretty common and generic terms. Meaning authors routinely ended up in categories where they had no intention appearing.

Furthermore, this keyword-category system didn’t just place books in the wrong categories – which is bad for the respective authors, but also the readers looking through that category searching for a new book – it also provided cover for those abusing the system.

Gaming The System
Some authors and publishers deliberately place their books in inappropriate categories in an attempt to game the system. It’s a lot easier to get to #1 in Fairy Tales than it is in Contemporary Romance. Those with more flexible morals have been putting their books into smaller categories with that in mind, regardless of how relevant that category was for their books, what a mess that made of the category for readers, or how hard they were making it for genuine authors of those types of books.

The situation is so out of hand right now that many authors think that an Amazon crackdown is coming. It’s not just the seedy end of self-publishing that’s to blame either. Established UK publishers are some of the worst abusers of metadata, in a nice change of pace.

Amazon Crackdown Coming?
Amazon has been slowly amending the terms and guidelines and help pages over the last while. You might have lso noticed some references to metadata infringements in the new Quality Dashboard. It currently only tracks things like typos and broken links. But you will see explicit references to metadata there as well. It appears that Amazon is slowly building out all the infrastructure needed to start policing things like mis-categorization of books.

So, ethics aside – always my favorite caveat – those who are miscategorizing their books to eke out some short-term advantage might want to start considering the long-term consequences. Amazon can be slow to click into gear with this stuff, but when it does, it can be ruthless.

But there’s one more reason why you should be careful where you place your books. The entire Amazon recommendation engine is built on relevance.

The Importance of Relevance
Some people will dump their books into any category going to gain advantage. They don’t care how much they mess up a category. Or what effect this has on genuine readers of that category (or authors trying to serve those readers).

But here’s the thing: they are only hurting themselves long-term. Even if you don’t care about the ethics around this, and I really wish you would, you are only grabbing some questionable short-term gains at the cost of some serious long-term pain.

Here’s why.

Amazon’s entire recommendation engine is built around relevance. Amazon doesn’t want to spam people with crappy recommendations. It knows the value of user trust in its recommendations and works very hard to personalize the Amazon site for each user experiencing it. Basically the equivalent of a bookstore rearranging itself so that your favorite books are always on the front table. That’s the aim, at least, and Amazon is the best in the business.

Don’t Feed The Beast Bad Data
I could write an entire book about this – and indeed I have: it’s called Amazon Decoded – but the short version is this. If you put your book in an inappropriate category all your are doing is feeding Amazon bad data. Do that, and will recommend your book to the wrong people.

Of course, if Amazon recommends your book to the wrong people, the conversion rate on those recommendations will be poor. Then it will be reticent to recommend your book further.

Even if you aren’t swayed by that, keep in mind the following. Amazon is probably going to start policing this stuff. There are all sorts of references now on the Help pages which hint at this now. The terms and conditions and in the Kindle Publishing Guidelines too. All sorts of references to the miscategorization of books and other metadata fouls like that. In other words, all signs point towards an impending crackdown.

All of which makes it exceedingly important that you know which are your ideal categories. Ones which will truly work for your book.

Researching Your Ideal Categories
It’s important to identify a list of target categories and there is only one way to do this: by taking your time to go through the Kindle Store and look at how it is broken down for your genre(s). Take note of any category or sub-category where your book would fit.

Some authors might struggle to identify more than a handful, whereas others will be overflowing with choices. Some genres have more granular sub-categories than others. And then non-fiction often has more places where a book could potentially be shelved without looking out of place. Author experiences will vary at this stage.

For those overflowing with choices: make a list of the must-haves and the maybes. Try to estimate how competitive each category is (i.e. look at the Sales Rank necessary to hit the Best Seller list). If you are really struggling to choose between several categories, perhaps consider having a mix of smaller categories where you could potentially chart now, and larger ones where you will benefit from extra visibility when you have a sales spike.

And for those authors struggling to find more than a handful of categories, keep looking! There are over 14,000 categories and you might find some useful ones if you search around. Amazon regularly expands the category system too; it’s good to check in on this periodically to see if new candidates have emerged.

Where To Find A List of Amazon Book Categories
To be clear, there is no list of categories anywhere that you can consult. A handful of websites purport to do that, but they are pulling from the limited menu available when publishing in KDP, rather than the actual category breakdown in the Kindle Store. Besides, all you need to do is head to the Kindle Store and nose around.

Looking for a list of categories is like trying to reinvent the wheel… while sitting outside a wheel factory that is handing out free wheels. (Don’t forget to repeat this process for print, and any international markets which are important to you.)

But hey, if you want to watch over my shoulder as I go through the Kindle Store and explain how you can find suitable categories, I got ya:


Your Action Plan: Category Optimization Checklist
This is fun because your action plan is to basically go through everything you just read in reverse!

Research your ideal categories.
Make a list of the must-haves and the maybes.
Check which categories your books are in right now.
Identify any bad categories you wish to remove.
Email KDP with your list of category changes.
Repeat the process for each book, and for any print editions or international stores you need.
And once your categories are updated, all you need to do is run a promotion and reap the benefits. And the most cost effective way to do that is with my curated and up-to-date list of book promotion sites.

One Last Tip
You can do all this in one email to KDP if you wish (you can even do all your books, all your print editions, all your international stores in one email – or even one call). Personally, I think the chance of errors is high if you go that route. I usually send one email per book to keep things straight – on both sides!

That’s it, I hope you learned a lot about Amazon categories today and how they can help you sell more books. I have a whole book like this breaking down the secrets of Amazon and showing you how to switch-up your marketing to seduce Amazon’s algorithms into recommending your book.

It’s called Amazon Decoded and I think you can pick it up pretty much everywhere for $4.99 or thereabouts.

Decoding Amazon recommendations
Feel free to leave any questions in the comments and I’ll respond if I ever stop eating for ten seconds.



------------------



How To Design A Book Cover That Sells
Updated by David Gaughran 8 January 2023. Publishing, Resources • 77 Comments.

Book cover design is the arguably most important stage in self-publishing a book. Certainly the step with the most impact on marketing anyway. Handle this process with care if you want to give yourself any chance of success.

Without the right cover, no one will give your book a chance. No matter how well-written it is, or how diligent your editor.

We are going to break down the anatomy of a great book cover. You will know what you’re shooting for, but that’s just the beginning.

This comprehensive guide to book cover design will also show you how to research your specific niche. You will learn what readers are already responding to, where to find your very own cover designer and what they might charge, and also how to write a design brief so the cover you get is exactly right for your niche — the secret sauce that many beginners miss.

You will also get options if you are on a budget, and specific guidance if you are one of those libertines who insist on designing their own book cover, no matter how many warning signs are erected along that path.

The Anatomy of a Great Book Cover
Book Cover Design Costs
Custom Cover (Hiring a Pro)
Premade Covers – For Limited Budgets
Designing Your Own Book Cover
How To Brief A Cover Designer
Bonus Extras: Paperbacks & Promo Graphics
Book Cover Design Checklist
The Anatomy of a Great Book Cover
The most misleading cliché in publishing is that you should never judge a book by its cover. Because almost every single reader does exactly that.

A great cover can sell a book all on its own. A bad one will sink the most wonderfully written story imaginable.

So far, so obvious.

Here’s where things get tricky. A good cover which doesn’t quite fit your particular book can cause serious problems – ones which are difficult to unwind.

Book covers must be nailed on for their respective niche or they will attract all the wrong readers — something that will hold back the success of your book. No matter what marketing magic you conjure forth.

Whether you want to spend on a custom cover, save money with a pre-made cover, or attempt designing your own, it is imperative that you know the respective conventions in your genre; stray from those at your peril.

What does great book cover design look like?
The first mistake authors make is to answer in an artistic sense, rather than a commercial one. Your book’s cover is not an expression of your soul as an artist. It’s a marketing tool – one which should be explicitly designed to get readers to click on it.

And not just any readers, but the right readers.

Remember that most readers will first encounter your cover as a small thumbnail in a retailer’s search results. Or as a small image among many in the charts, or as one of dozens of items clamoring for attention on an Amazon product page. Not in glorious, full-size, attention-grabbing hi-res. And certainly not as a giant image which graces the oversized computer monitors that designers tend to favor.

This means that your book cover design should be simple rather than ornate. And it should be striking instead of subtle. As Seth Godin once said, designing an effective ebook cover is like designing a desktop icon – as opposed to than the wraparound hardback of your authorial fantasies.

Also, the idea isn’t to convey every single story element. But you must clearly communicate what kind of book it is. Adding even more difficulty to that tightrope walk is the need to do this in a granular fashion.

Niche Down
This means that your cover shouldn’t just hint at romance, thriller, or fantasy. It should go deeper again and scream paranormal romance, cozy mystery, women’s fiction, epic fantasy, historical adventure, legal thriller, and so on.

These are all distinct niches with their own cover conventions, which must be respected if you wish to sell books. If that’s not a concern, do whatever the hell you like.

I can imagine lots of authors chafing at this advice. This isn’t evidence of publishers or designers lacking imagination, but simple recognition that you have milliseconds to grab a reader’s attention in the fast-moving stream of the internet.

You should use that time wisely and flash up a giant neon sign. “This is the kind of book you love!”

Great book cover design is a bat-signal to its target reader.

Even within sub-genres, there are variances across different niches. For example, a historical romance set in the glens of Scotland might have a burly chap in a kilt wielding a large sword. But a regency romance is more likely to have a silk-gloved lady in an epic ballgown.

You need to know these differences. Or hire a professional.

Even if you do hire a professional, which I strongly recommend, it’s still important to research your niche, to know what is selling, and to brief your designer accordingly – and I’ll show you how to do exactly that in a moment. And if you are designing your own cover, you need to know that stuff inside out.

Book Cover Design Costs
There are just two steps in the self-publishing process where I think it’s really important to spend money. Finding an editor is one, and designing your cover is the other. Just don’t panic when you see some of the prices quoted below — I will give options for those on more restricted budgets.

However, let me also add that you should consider this an investment in your book just as much as it is an expense, should funds allow; you can’t magic money from thin air, alas.

Let me give you some ballpark figures before exploring each option in detail:

$300-$500 – the starting price of a good custom cover.
$30-$40 – is the surprisingly low floor for a pre-made cover.
$0 – DIY costs nothing, naturally, but you might still be paying for software and stock photos, and other stuff like that.
Now let’s look at the pros and cons of each of those options in detail.

Custom Cover (i.e. Hiring A Pro)
Hiring an experienced, professional designer to create a custom cover for your book is easily the best option for all authors… if they can afford it.

Rates vary quite a lot — and the sky really is the limit with the world’s most in-demand designers. However, despite what some unscrupulous and ill-informed types would have you believe, you can get a good custom cover designed for $300-$500.

It will be more again if the design involves buying exclusive rights to a custom piece of art, rather than the more standard stock photo manipulation, but that’s a pretty high-end approach that most beginners can ignore.

Those with real money to burn can go to town here by commissioning an illustration or organizing their own photo shoots, but this is the realm of bona fide bestsellers and we shan’t linger and press our noses against the glass. We’ll dispense with FOMO by telling ourselves that such things can be more hassle than they are worth.

Seriously though, you really can get a very good cover in that price band of $300-$500. But to ensure it is 100% dialed in for your niche as well as being competent or pretty, you need to brief your designer correctly – which we’ll get to momentarily.

For my specific recommendation on professional book cover designers who do wonderful custom covers in that price band, grab your free self-publishing guide – which is available from your preferred retailer. And if you work your way through this article, I’ll throw you a marrow-filled bone at the end as well.

Options For A Limited Budget
“What if I don’t have $300-$500?” you might reasonably ask. Well, you do have options – other than ennui, I mean.

Most authors in this position make one of two mistakes: they either jump right to designing their own book cover, often with terrible results, or they ask a friend who has some design experience… but not book experience.

Before those on a budget turn the air blue, there is a much better idea. One that almost everybody can afford.

Premade Covers
A premade cover can be just as enticing and professional as a custom one, but only costs a fraction of the price – sometimes as little as $30 or $40.

What sorcery is this? Let’s take a look.

Pre-made covers are also professionally designed but are basically spare covers that designers have knocking around. But those can be great quality too. When you get a custom cover, the designer will often offer you a few different mock-ups of your cover, and then only finalize the one you choose. The leftover covers you didn’t select are often then sold as pre-mades at a vastly reduced price.

There are many pre-made cover sites, and quality varies a lot. GoOnWrite.com is consistently the best of the bunch with a huge selection of pre-mades broken down by genre for just $40.

Only downside with pre-mades, aside from being restricted to the selection on offer, is that you can only usually change the author name and title, and that’s it.

No fiddling! You take what you’re given. Of course, you might also have to spend quite a bit of time scouring pre-made cover collections before finding something suitable.

But once you do, the cover is sold just once, to you, and no one else can purchase it.

Just keep in mind that if it is using a stock photo, you may see that photo elsewhere, even in a similar context. The cover design is exclusively yours though – and that’s what you are acquiring.

For something truly unique that costs nothing at all, you can design your own cover. But does that mean you should?

Designing Your Own Book Cover
Hoo-boy. Here’s where you can really get yourself in trouble.

A truly unfortunate mistake that newer self-publishers can sometimes make is not hiring an editor and/or a cover designer, as those tend to be the two biggest expenses… and then spending that money on marketing instead.

Or wasting that money on marketing, I should say. Because you can’t sell a book with a bad cover – no matter what promotional fireworks you drum up.

It’s worth repeating: you are better off scouring pre-made cover sites for something suitable rather than designing your own cover, unless you are an experienced designer. If design is something you merely dabble in, I’d recommend holding off and cutting your teeth on things like promo graphics first – more on those below.

However, I know some resolutely independent authors will disregard such advice, no matter how forcefully I express it, so let me give you some pointers and point you towards my favorite tools.

I still think you should be very cautious – even if you have design experience, there are so many specific quirks to book cover design, and ebook cover design in particular, that even good designers from other fields can slip up on their first go.

Focus On The Ebook
Here’s one common pitfall: designers without specific ebook experience can sometimes optimize their design for the print edition, and not realize the ebook edition should take primacy, particularly for self-publishers.

If that sounds strange to you, keep in mind that a typical self-publisher will regularly see 80%-90% of their sales in ebook formats. And where this isn’t true, that’s normally because they haven’t really gotten sales going generally.

Even in the few exceptions where a self-publisher has strong and consistent print sales, readers will still tend to discover their work online, meaning they will usually view that cover first as a small thumbnail among many others.

So, the same rules apply. Keep it simple and striking and communicate that genre quickly and cleanly – and the specific niche within the genre too.

Pour Love Into Your Lettering
What else? Spend a lot of time on the typography. Good lettering can truly elevate a mediocre cover, and amateur lettering can ruin the most lovely photo or illustration. Some designers do master’s degrees in typography – there’s that much to it, and it’s that important.

Spend a lot of time getting the title and author name right or you will undermine the rest of your design. And when it comes to plastering your name on the front, don’t be shy. Some authors think you have to “earn” a larger font size. This is a holdover from traditional publishing you can – and should – ignore.

Try to make your title and author name legible in thumbnail and make sure your fonts work well together. While a stylized font for your title can work, I generally think a less stylized one for the author name almost always works best, regardless of what you choose for the title.

The same rule applies to lettering as it does to your overall composition and cover generally: look at what’s dominating the charts, and make sure you fit in. Don’t slavishly copy anyone, but don’t look out of place either. The books in the charts are what readers are already responding to, after all. Take time with this research step – I’ll break it down in detail below – and that will really help you nail down some rather important details.

Knowing the differences between niches which I spoke about above assumes even more importance if you design your own covers or promo graphics.

Finally, for any kind of design work you might fancy handling yourself, check out my post on my favorite tools for wrangling promo graphics, which also work well as free book cover design tools.

free book cover design tools
How To Brief A Cover Designer
I recommend following this process whether you are hiring a professional designer for a custom cover, or designing your own – even if you are simply purchasing a pre-made cover.

Going through this process of drawing up a design brief will help you so much when it comes to marketing your book, and will also assist you in generating some crucial assets like your marketing tagline and your blurb – things you don’t want to be scrambling to produce under pressure.

Take the time to do this right, and you will reap the rewards.

The process here somewhat mimics the internal process in a large publisher when an editor is commissioning a cover, with some adaptions made to suit the world of ebooks and self-publishing.

Now, some designers might not want all this information from you, and that’s fine. Many are strictly visual – of course they are – but the process is very useful for both sides anyway. Besides, your designer can (and will) just disregard any extra detail they don’t need.

I recommend saving a document on your computer with all this information, because you will be referring back to it yourself when actually uploading your book to the various retailers, and when creating your marketing campaigns – trust me.

Some of it might sound a little silly… but go with me on this.

Write the following headings into a document, and then try and fill them out according to my directions. Don’t worry if some of this takes time – it really should, if you are doing it properly. And then when you are discussing your cover with your designer, you can just give them the document and they will cherry pick what is useful to them.

Author Name and Title
This is not as obvious as it seems. Presumably you know your own name, but have you checked if it is already in use? You definitely want to do that before paying $300-$500 to slap it on a book cover, because you may need to add an initial, or use something else altogether.

Glomming off a more famous name – intentionally or otherwise – will only end in tears.

While this isn’t the place for a lengthy digression on what makes a good book title, let me just note that you need to have this 100% nailed down before commissioning your cover. Again, you might want to check if your title is in use. While titles can’t be copyrighted, they can be trademarked. It is common for titles to be re-used (says the author of a book called Mercenary), but I’d recommend staying away from re-using a title in the same niche, especially from a recent release.

Here’s something less obvious: is this book a series? Have you picked a series name? That’s something you should do before publishing, and before commissioning your cover.

Keep in mind that different niches have trends and styles when it comes to titles as well. Literary books can be wordier – and I’m sure you’re so surprised to hear that your eyebrows shot right off your face and out the window – and thrillers, to give one example, can often be just one word. Survey your genre, note the commonalities. Non-fiction types especially will need to come up with a sub-title as well – note that Amazon can ding you for using a sub-title which doesn’t appear on your cover.

One final point for those writing a series: one way to ensure strong branding across a series is with the title. If Agatha Christie was self-publishing today, she might have followed up Murder on the Orient Express with Murder on the Eurostar and then Murder on the 10:26 To Chepstow.

Best not to box yourself in with the choice for Book 1. Do a little brainstorming on potential titles for future books as well.

Your tagline
You don’t strictly need a tagline, but trust me when I say that you will find endless uses for one. I personally find the process of generating one quite painful – I don’t have that natural talent for taglines that some authors possess – but it’s always worth it.

When someone asks me what my novel Mercenary is about, for example, I can tell them that it’s the story of “USA’s most famous soldier of fortune, a hard-drinking drifter who changed the face of a nation.” I can then use that tagline on my cover, in my description, in my Facebook Ads, in the sales copy at the back of my books when talking about the other things I’ve written, and so on.

The tagline might come to you first, or it might organically spring forth from the process of writing your description.

Don’t make that face! You actually do need to write your description at this point, and the reason why it’s essential in the cover design process is that those pesky paperbacks require a book description for the back cover.

A lesson most authors learn the hard way when the designer asks them what to put in that space. And then they scramble. And when you scramble, you make mistakes… says the guy who had a goddamn typo on the back cover of one of his books for quite some time.

Yeah. Don’t do that.

Book description
Here’s where you really do need to take the time to look at what’s going on in your genre. But before you even do that, I recommend looking at the book descriptions on Amazon for five of your favorite books. Even better: try and write the descriptions yourself first and then read the descriptions online.

Unless you are preternaturally talented on this front, you should notice the real descriptions are probably leaner and meaner and focusing on the core conflicts of the story.

You should also notice that styles vary a lot depending on the genre. One more reason why you should have good knowledge of what’s happening in yours.

I’m not going to sugarcoat this; I find writing descriptions to be a bore. Worse than that, painful. Something about the process triggers some primeval sense of foreboding, as if I’ll suddenly realize that I have put all my book’s words in the wrong order.

What can I say, I have an overactive-imagination. Just don’t worry if you feel the same way too – it’s normal enough.

Hewing to a formula can help. Most novels are about a hero who wants something and has to overcome some kind of obstacle to get it, and you just need to put some flesh on that story skeleton in an efficient manner. Practice really does make perfect here. That and wine.

Calling in some reinforcements can help. I sometimes trade blurb-writing duties with a friend. She has the emotional distance from my story to boil it down to its core essentials, and I have with hers.

If you need more hands-on help with writing your book description, I recommend staying away from paid services – I can think of at least one which is heavily marketed to authors but the blurbs are really not great.

Read Book Blurbs Unleashed by Robert J. Ryan instead, who is an experienced professional copywriter and knows his stuff.

Target audience
You should at least have some idea who you are writing for. You will get better at defining this as you get more experience and it’s perfectly fine to be vague. Maybe you know enough to say “my target audience is grizzled vets who love action-filled science fiction and tend enjoy themes of brotherhood, honor, and duty.” But it’s also okay to just know your target audience likes small-town sweet romance.

Comp authors
Here you need to be a bit more detailed, and definitely don’t be shy. If you are aiming to pinch readers off E.L. James or Dan Brown, then say so – it’s not public anyway. Knowing who your “comp authors” are is pretty important, and something else that you will return to again and again over your career.

Newer authors can be reticent to say that their comp authors are the likes of Brandon Sanderson or Kristin Hannah.

This isn’t about who you write like or who you think you might outsell one day, for that matter. It’s about the readership you are aiming for.

So if you do write fast-paced, multi-faceted epic fantasy or thoughtful character-driven historical fiction, Brandon Sanderson or Kristin Hannah could well be perfect comp authors for you.

This guide to comp authors should give you some more to work with, should you need it.

How to find your comp authors header image
Book covers you love… and hate
Confession: most designers could ignore almost everything you have generated up to this point, and that’s totally fine – I trust it was a useful exercise for you anyway. And it will help you with this part, which really is important to all designers.

You need to give them a list of book covers that you love. It helps if they are also from the genre you are working in, but if you want to include one or two from outside that which have certain features you like, feel free.

I don’t need to explain why designers might find this useful, but want to add that it’s just as illustrative to include some covers you hate – especially if they represent things trending in your niche that you want to avoid, for whatever reason. For example, when redesigning my non-fiction, I was quite insistent that my designer avoid white covers, because (a) I felt they were overdone in my niche and (b) I think they get swallowed up by the white backgrounds which predominate at the retailers.

Your complete design brief
That’s all the information you need for your design brief. Just send all the above to your designer and let them come back to you with any specific questions. Usually they will mock up a few covers and see which you respond to best, and then finish that one off for you, incorporating any changes you need.

For those scouring pre-made collections instead, this process should help you zoom in on the more suitable covers. And for the intrepid types designing their own… I really hope you spend more time on this part of the process than anyone else.

All of you should quickly run through the final section on print editions and promo graphics, because, if you’re smart, you can get your designer to throw in some very handy extras. And the cheapest and easiest time to do that is when you are commissioning your cover.

Bonus Extras: Paperbacks and Promo Graphics
For a small surcharge most designers will happily include a paperback version of your ebook cover – and if you have followed the steps above, you will be ready to roll on that front too, which gives you the possibility of launching the paperback simultaneously, or at least soon afterwards.

I sell a decent amount of print, but there’s always a huge difference based on how long I take to get that paperback version out – which makes sense. Launch week is when your most passionate fans will be purchasing, and when you will have more attention on your new release.

But don’t worry if you are not ready to actually release the paperback quite yet – designers will usually let you cash in that chit later, when you have all your bits and bobs lined up.

And there’s more.

The time when you’re ordering your book cover is also when you’ll get the best deal on other extras, like promo graphics. For a small additional fee, most designers will be happy to generate graphics for your website, newsletters, or Facebook Page – as well as ads for Facebook and BookBub as well, if you plan on doing those.

Useful Graphic Sizes
1200×628 if you want the “letterbox” shape for Facebook posts and ads.
1080×1080 for Instagram, and also for that square shape on Facebook.
640×200 is a good size for newsletter banners.
820×360 will work for your Facebook Cover Photo – i.e. the header on your Facebook Page.
Various is the only size guide I can give for your website because everyone’s needs there will be different. About as useful as a chocolate fireguard, but there you go.
For those who want to try and create promo graphics themselves – which is an exceedingly useful skill, and one I recommend you develop – I have a variety of video tutorials on my YouTube channel, which will give you a step-by-step on-screen process that you can follow, one that will work for almost any book.

I have a bunch of these on my channel but here’s the latest one covering ad graphics for both Facebook Ads and BookBub Ads.


For either platform, and for your graphical needs in general, I strongly recommend asking your designer to give you the file for your book cover with the lettering removed.

This “blank” cover will enable you to use the cover art for all sorts of promotional graphics, not just ads. Designers should provide that free, so there’s no reason not to get it.

Book Cover Design Checklist
That was a lot of info and it’s all important, but let me summarize what you need to do in a handy checklist.

Understand what makes great book cover design – ebooks especially.
Know your niche – spend time on this or I will personally scold you.
Decide between a custom cover, a pre-made, or DIY.
Compile your design brief and don’t skip any of the recommended steps!
Communicate all this to your designer if you are going the custom route.
Commission your extras or DIY – you will need them either way.
And that’s it!

Please feel free to ask your questions in the comments. I do want to help you all get the very best covers you can for your books. It’s such an important step that far too many get wrong.

I promised a recommendation at the end for a good cover designer. If you want one I recommend who works in a few genres and is competitively priced, try Deranged Doctor Designs. They will do your ebook and paperback and audiobook for just $420 (as of January 2023).

Feel free to recommend your cover designer in the comments. But please note the genre so the recommendation is more useful for everyone.

Feel free to link to their site… but no self-promotion, please.



-------------------


9 Ways To Unleash The Power of Free
Updated by David Gaughran 12 March 2026. Marketing • 15 Comments.

Authors are giving away more stuff than ever before: permafree books, reader magnets, and ARCs are just the tip of the iceberg. What’s going on? Should you jump on the free train? Does any of this stuff generate money? Let’s break it down.

The self-publishing landscape today looks very different from when I started fifteen years ago, that heady time when ebooks first exploded in popularity.

But readers today respond just as well to free offers and discounts. Many people have less disposable income right now – or worry about having less tomorrow. Freebies also look particularly enticing when you have a new device to fill with books.

Here are nine ways to unleash the power of free, so that you can tap into this surge of new readers, build your audience, and make more money too. Yes, all these freehunters can be more than happy to pay for things… if you hook them.

Free Promotions
Permafree
Reader Magnet
ARCs
Re-engagement Cookie
Content Upgrades
Advanced Previews
Public Beta
Audio Magnet
Free Promotions
The easiest and most obvious way to tap into the power of free is to run a free promo. Although it’s not quite as straightforward as it looks.

On non-Amazon retailers, you simply set the price to zero, or schedule your price of $0.00 for the date you wish the promotion to start. However, Amazon doesn’t let you set books free directly. You must wait for it to go free one one of the other retailers, and then ask KDP to price match.

The exception to that is if you are enrolled in KDP Select and exclusive to Amazon. Then you can do this easily and automatically via a Kindle Free Promotion, but there are a bunch of restrictions.

If you are a wide author, the main logic behind a free promotion is to drive sales to your other books. If you are exclusive to Amazon, you get that benefit, plus the gravy of Kindle Unlimited page reads – which can spike after a free promotion, if you rack up enough downloads.

In either case, it’s strongly recommended that you advertise your free deal to have any impact. There are a range of effective and affordable book promo sites where you can pimp your freebie.

My list is recommend book promotion sites is heavily curated and right up to date, and has all sorts of options depending on your budget.

One quick tip: start planning about thirty days out so you have the full suite of recommended sites to choose from.

Best Book Promo Sites 2026 Promotion promote a book
Permafree
New authors can sometimes be wary at the thought of doing a free promotion. And aghast at the suggestion that they might give a book away for free permanently.

However, it’s one of the easiest and cheapest ways of getting eyes on your work in a crowded marketplace. And it’s especially powerful at hooking readers on a character whose adventures play out over multiple books.

A permanently free – or “permafree” – series opener is an established and effective ebook pricing strategy. One that is particularly popular with wide authors.

Of course, this strategy won’t pay out unless you actually have more books to sell. But if you have written a series or you are planning one – which you really should, if you want to make money – then making the first book permafree is something you could consider.

Authors don’t usually make Book 1 free from the get-go, in case that thought gives you hives. Often they will launch at full price. Then as more books come out in the series, they drop the price of Book 1. Some authors swear by a 99¢ series opener, whereas others will rave about free.

No need to sweat this decision. You can experiment.

Important note: if you are too fixated on individual price points (e.g. “my book is worth more than a coffee”) then you could be missing out on the huge boost in overall income that a cheap series opener can deliver.

Experimenting, and being flexible, is the key to a savvy ebook pricing strategy. And in 2021 when free offers are hotter than ever, having a permafree book can dramatically expand your audience. Which can dramatically boost your income as readers devour your entire series.

If you are worried about self-publishers or cheap books destroying the publishing industry, then read this superb post from Ed Robertson on how our supposed bargain basement pricing is perfectly in line with historical paperback prices. Which led to a huge expansion in reading, of course.

Reader Magnet
A reader magnet is a free bonus which encourages readers to sign up to your newsletter. Usually it’s a free story or book, but it can be anything really. Some authors have gotten extremely creative here. Readers love them too — find them magnetic, even.

But to really attract readers in great numbers, consider that the most powerful magnets share two key characteristics. They are enticing, and they are exclusive.

How to make a reader magnet enticing
First the enticing part: a short story will do, a novella will more than suffice, but a full book is the most attractive to readers — all other things being equal, of course. But the actual length of the reader magnet doesn’t matter as much as tying it closely to your main series, the world you write in, or one of your popular characters.

Remember that a magnet has a twin role: attracting new-to-you readers and encouraging existing ones to sign-up.

If you tie the magnet closely to the universe of your books it will handle both jobs pretty well. Existing readers will always want to spend more time in the worlds you have lovingly created. (Or non-fiction readers will always want more key insights and practical takeaways on your area of expertise.) And then new-to-you readers who like your magnet will be very interested in more adventures featuring the same characters or settings.

Some authors go further again and make two reader magnets – one for existing readers and one for totally fresh ones. It can be a particularly effective strategy if you have lots of shorter pieces laying around that you don’t know what to do with. And a very savvy one if you are using Facebook ads to aggressively grow your mailing list.

Why your reader magnet should be exclusive
And now the exclusive part: make signing up to your list the only place readers can get this story. Even for money! Don’t sell it on Amazon, or anywhere else for that matter.

Enticing… and exclusive. Put those two together, and you have one powerful reader magnet.

Make sure to have an optimized sign-up page on your website dangling your magnet. Then advertise this in the front and the back of your books, and your social channels.

There are more resources on email at the end of this post. But in case you are wondering, I use MailerLite to manage my newsletter (affiliate link). And I use BookFunnel to distribute my reader magnet.

If you want to see how all that works in practice, feel free to sign up to my marketing newsletter. You will see my sign-up page, my welcome sequence, how I dole out my magnet. Plus you’ll get free marketing advice every Friday if you decide to stick around. (No hard feelings if you don’t.)

ARCs
Advanced Review Copies or ARCs is the name for the practice of distributing free copies of your upcoming release to a select group of readers — usually to garner reviews but sometimes to generate buzz.

It’s a long-standing practice in the print-focused world of traditional publishing. And something that has really come into its own in the more digital world of self-publishing, thanks to it’s low cost and effectiveness in generating reviews especially.

Authors sometimes worry that giving out ARCs will cannibalize launch sales among their most passionate readers (and most likely buyers). But they should zoom back a little. Reviews are worth more than sales, especially during launch week when your book has no reviews but extra visibility. Besides, you only need to give out a handful of ARCs really.

Here’s the kicker: often the recipients of ARCs are the kind of loyal fans who buy the book anyway to support you — they want more books by you, remember? — and also champion your work to further readers as well.

I don’t particularly worry about book piracy myself. But if that is a concern of yours, you can gift books securely via BookFunnel – which is just one of the awesome add-on features you will get as part of your subscription.

Re-engagement Cookie
Ugh: jargon! Okay, so a cookie is just the nickname for any freebie doled out to a mailing list subscriber — terminology which will be familiar to anyone who has read Newsletter Ninja. Reader magnets are a type of cookie, for example.

A re-engagement cookie is a freebie whose aim is to turn a reader’s head when they are eyeing the exit. Feel free to explore Newsletter Ninja if you want to get into the mechanics. In short though, you need to segment out readers who are terminally disengaged – i.e. not opening or clicking anything in your newsletters for ages. Ask them if they want to stay or go, and dangle the cookie as a reward.

They get a free story, you get a more engaged list — a leaner one too, after you have trimmed those who have no interest in being there. And really, if someone doesn’t want a freebie from you, they are highly unlikely to ever buy anything in the future.

There’s little point keeping them — they only drag down the performance of your list, and can ultimately affect your overall deliverability, meaning the people who actually want your newsletters can stop receiving them.

Relationships take work. Not every reader-story has a happy ending, but sometimes you can spice things up with a well-timed cookie.

Short stories can be perfect for the this job, especially if you have some gathering cyberdust on your hard drive.

BTW, if you have several such stories you might want to check out my primer on publishing short stories – which goes through the many ways you can publish them, but also how you can use them for marketing purposes.

Content Upgrade
This is where hyper-productive non-fiction authors can really shine, especially if they have a website like this one, and all sorts of content for their target audience to enjoy.

Content upgrades are context-specific reader magnets. An example might be this: imagine you wrote several books on financial planning. You might have a blog post on how to file your tax returns. A cool content upgrade you could offer at the bottom of that post might be a tax calculator.

And then if you had another blog post about controlling costs, you might offer a content upgrade specific to that post – for example a short guide to allowable business expenses.

Many readers in that target market would happily fork over their deets for either of those freebies. Tailoring freebies to the context can be very powerful indeed.

Do this on several of your most trafficked posts and your list will get a tremendous boost.

Advanced Preview
Authors have tried generating interest in upcoming books by publishing previews directly on Amazon — but it’s a risky game. Even huge household names with loyal fanbases have incurred reader-ire with this approach, so tread very carefully indeed.

A safer way might be to avoid retailers altogether with this strategy, especially when it’s an open question how Amazon feels about the practice.

Instead, consider using your email list for this — somewhere you set the rules, and where there are less chances of reader misunderstandings (and no chance at all of angry one-star reviews!).

An advanced preview can function as a reader magnet, a general cookie for your list, or even a re-engagement cookie.

How might the latter work? Well, if life gets in the way and the next instalment in your series is delayed, some readers might become disengaged over time.

An exclusive sneak preview might be just the tonic which will convince them to hang around. Giving them just enough of a taste to keep them hooked on your product.

Public Beta
If the last idea gave you heebie-jeebies, you might want to head for the panic room right now because we’re about to turn things up to 11.

Some authors write with the door closed — which is fine; whatever works. But non-fiction authors in particular might be intrigued by the idea of a public beta: letting readers paw through your upcoming release… and pull it apart.

I appreciate this might be nightmare fuel for some authors, and I would never do it with fiction, personally. But it can be a very potent tactic.

I gave away over 10,000 copies of the first edition of Amazon Decoded. It was only available as a reader magnet at the time; you couldn’t buy it anywhere, even though it was a book which was in high demand. (Enticing and exclusive, remember?)

At the back of the book, I didn’t have a hooky CTA. Instead, I invited readers to share feedback with me directly and then used that to explicitly shape the second edition — which was release as a full-length book 18 months later. One with a price tag.

It was a very successful launch, made me a fair bit of money, and if the Amazon reviews are anything to go by, readers loved the content too. Perhaps because they felt involved in the process — because they genuinely were.

Readers got a better book for their troubles too, one they were more than happy to pay for.

This isn’t a new tactic at all. Software companies and games and various online services have been doing versions of this for years. And I vaguely remember Guy Kawasaki doing something similar several years ago with his bestselling author guide Author, Publisher, Entrepreneur.

However, I wanted to share my direct experience with this one because it is kind of crazy. And to assure that, with the right circumstances, it really can work.

Yes, advanced previews and public betas are different things
In case anyone wonders what the difference is between an advanced preview and a public beta, fair enough. Let me explain.

Advanced previews are giving people a glimpse of upcoming finished work, and the aim is to generate buzz or drive sign-ups to your list.

Public betas show unfinished stuff with the aim of incorporating feedback in the finished product, but can also generate buzz, sign-ups, or engagement as a happy side-effect.

Audio Magnet
This is where I might lose you.

It’s one thing to give away a book which you have labored over, you might reasonably object, and quite another to give away an audiobook which you have labored over… and possibly invested thousands of dollars in as well; audiobook production costs can be considerable.

However, that’s not quite what I’m suggesting.

Audio magnets are exactly what you might think: a free short story, novella, or book in audio format which is offered as a sign-up bonus.

Why might you want to do such a thing? Well, for all the same reasons you might have a reader magnet: namely to attract audiobook consumers to your list.

If you have invested in audiobook production, you will be seeking to repay those costs. Marketing audiobooks can be challenging — we simply don’t have the same tools and strategies are still developing. But the audiobook market is growing fast and can be extremely lucrative.

Like many of the marketing options starting to spring up for audio, this will probably work best if you have (a) paid for production and are not involved in royalty-share entanglements and (b) are not exclusive to ACX.

If you are fully free to play around with your audiobooks, then you have a freer hand marketing-wise and can explore audio magnets, building up an audio-specific mailing list (or an audio-focused segment of your existing list), and even many of the previous options on this list in audio form instead.

And if that has your mind whirring about building up an operation to sell audiobooks directly to your fans, then you should really read this post from BookFunnel.

Final Note From Dave:
I hope this post gave you some ideas, but also some confidence to use the power of free effectively and strategically.

It’s not about giving away the farm and then crossing your fingers and hoping for the best.

It most certainly is about coming up with new and creative ways to get readers to try your work, with the specific aim of converting them into lifelong paying customers.

A lot of the above ideas aim to drive more sign-ups to your mailing list, something that free offers are exceptionally good at. But to ensure you are making the most of your newsletter, check out these handy tips.


---------------


Amazon Recommendations & Also Boughts
Updated by David Gaughran 22 January 2022. Amazon • 19 Comments.

Amazon recommendations drive millions of dollars of book purchases every single day, and Also Boughts are central to this system, which can lead to panic when they periodically disappear.

Also Boughts play an important role in Amazon recommendations — that process of pairing books to readers like some literary version of Tinder — but the exact role in Amazon’s recommender system can be misunderstood.

So let’s break it all down today. I’ll show you the exact role Also Boughts play in Amazon recommendations, and why you need to protect yours.

What Are Also Boughts?
How Amazon Recommendations Work
Product Connections vs. Similar People
Also Bought Myths & Benefits
Personal or Contextual Recommendations
Also Bought Pollution
How To Protect Your Also Boughts
When Gaming The System Goes Wrong
Takeaway: Amazon Has Been Decoded
What Are Also Boughts?
Also Boughts reflect the other purchases your readers are making, and also influence which readers Amazon recommends books to next. As a result, Also Boughts have become the focus of attention among savvy self-publishers in recent years.

You can view them on any book’s product page on Amazon. You may have noticed a strip of books underneath the product description. It’s the section headlined with “Customers who bought this item also bought” which looks like this:

Also Boughts example - customers who bought this item also bought
The Also Bought strip doesn’t update as frequently as some parts of the Kindle Store. It usually refreshes twice a week, on Thursday and Sunday evenings; they are an up-to-date indication of how Amazon views your book.

Experienced self-publishers watch Also Boughts closely. Amazon’s system is always trying to determine what kind of products each individual customer is most likely to purchase, so it can make better recommendations. One thing which is super important in this process is the connection between products. People who buy printers tend to buy ink.

Predicative recommendations
But it’s not just obvious pairings like leathers and feathers. Amazon’s system is constantly analyzing what everyone purchases. It then tries to predict what customers will buy next by crunching All The Data.

The net effect when it comes to authors is this. If your book appears in the Also Boughts of a book in your niche which is selling well, this can lead to a noticeable increase in sales. Conversely, if something goes wrong with your Also Boughts, it can lead to a measurable dip.

It was understandable that authors would begin worrying when Amazon seemed to remove Also Boughts from book pages. Some even claimed that Amazon would stop recommending books organically, restricting visibility to those paying for Amazon Ads.

But that’s not how the recommender system works. And I can show you exactly what I mean.

How Amazon Recommendations Really Work
Amazon makes millions of book recommendations to readers every single day. On-site, in various slots around the Kindle Store, and by email as well. These recommendations take many different forms.

Some Amazon recommendations are very top-down. But most are either personalized for each individual reader, or contextual — based on what the reader is viewing at that moment. Or the place they are in the Kindle Store. Even an action they just performed. All this is unaffected by Also Boughts disappearing from book pages.

Let me give you an example.

During the research process for my book Amazon Decoded, I conducted a number of revealing experiments.

Closing the next sale
Have you ever noticed what happens when you buy a book in the Kindle Store? Specifically, have you noticed what happens on-screen afterwards? Amazon never misses a trick and as soon as you complete payment, a confirmation screen appears recommending more books.

Amazon is split-testing things all the time. You may see this play out slightly differently each time you purchase a book. Commonly, you will see Amazon push the book in the #1 Also Bought slot pretty hard.

(Unless there is an audiobook edition which is Whispersynced, then Amazon will often favor that recommendation instead. It can experiment with other approaches, such as a carousel of books. But this will also be heavily influenced by the Also Boughts of what you just purchased.)

(Assuming your Book 2 is that #1 Also Bought, of course, and that your series metadata is in perfect shape.)

This is the kind of thing that doesn’t happen so much on the other retailers; they simply don’t have recommender systems as sophisticated as that powering the millions of Amazon recommendations every day.

Other retailers do have rudimentary recommendation engines. But Amazon is quite literally years ahead of the competition; it doesn’t feel like that gap is closing because different philosophies are in play.

Product Connections vs. Similar People
The research process for Amazon Decoded unearthed some fascinating information about recommender systems generally and the associated data-crunching, machine learning, AI, algorithms – that big system for pairing readers with books they will love.

I learned how Amazon’s recommendation engine was the first to really map out connections between products, rather than people. How this was a great leap forward in the efficacy of recommender systems generally – to the extent that it is still studied by academics almost twenty years later, as well as by companies like Netflix, busy building their own such systems.

How are Also Boughts connected?
And here’s the pertinent bit. The process described above of “checkout recommendations” is completely unaffected by whether Also Boughts are at the top of your book’s product page in prime position, or if they are shunted down to the bottom of the page where most readers won’t see them, or if they are gone temporarily, or even if they are axed permanently.

The status of Also Boughts on your book’s page does not affect the underlying recommendation engine one bit. And these Amazon recommendations are what drive so many of our sales — probably most of the sales we aren’t directly responsible for ourselves, with our own marketing.

This is why any marketing push seems to go further on Amazon, versus other retailers, and why marketing campaigns tend to have a much longer “halo effect” on Amazon — even accounting for relative size. And this is why it’s often far easier for newer authors to bootstrap their way to success in the Kindle Store than anywhere else.

Also Bought Myths & Benefits
A common misconception is that it is the Also Boughts themselves – the strip of books on your product page – driving those sales and recommendations. However, it’s the underlying system, those connections mapped out between books, which is what triggers Amazon to often recommend Debbie Macomber to a reader after she purchases Nora Roberts.

This process doesn’t stop just because Also Boughts go away, the whole recommendation engine makes millions of suggestions to readers every single day and that system doesn’t come to a shuddering halt because Amazon wants to tinker with that slot on our book pages; I suggest that authors stop fretting about the general status of Also Boughts.

Of course, it would be better if Amazon would stop messing with Also Boughts altogether — I’m certainly not claiming otherwise.

Amazonian tinkering
The experimentation with this piece of real estate has been relentless, and increasing. I can think of a dozen different things Amazon has tried to shoehorn onto our book’s pages in the place of Also Boughts. Although I should also point out that these experiments have been going on for as long as I can remember – this is not a recent phenomenon, there is just more awareness among writers about Also Boughts these days.

And, yes, I will also grant that there is probably a moderate amount of on-page discovery. I’m sure some readers spot your book in someone else’s Also Boughts and purchase it instead, but also remember that cuts both ways.

Much more importantly, if we look at the typical CTR of an Amazon ad (there’s a wide range here but even a successful ad might be as low as 0.1%), this would seem to strongly indicate that the amount of on-page discovery that happens via Also Boughts has been greatly overstated.

Personal vs. Contextual Recommendations
Amazon recommends books to readers in many different ways. Some of those are very generalized, hand-picked recommendations like the Kindle Daily Deals. Others are larger selections of curated deals, which are then sorted algorithmically (like Kindle Monthly Deals, which tend to be sorted by Popularity).

Further types of recommendations are completely contextual – triggered by the category charts a reader regularly views. Or those recommendations which pop up on screen after a purchase. More again are 100% personalized; the books you see recommended to you on the homepage of Amazon are an obvious example.

Let’s be clear: this entire system of recommendations is unaffected by Also Boughts disappearing.

Email recommendations
Amazon makes even more types of recommendations to readers – predominantly in the form of millions of targeted emails. Some of these emails are hyper-personalized in the sense that they are strictly based on your own purchasing habits, or your own browsing habits.

(Indeed, Amazon cycles between the two depending on whether the system thinks your purchase intent is strong, or if you are more at the discovery state of your buyer journey, and it does that by looking at your browsing patterns in quite a sophisticated way.)

Some of those emails will be contextual rather than personalized too – for example Amazon will often recommend you that #1 Also Bought again, around two weeks after your purchase of that original book.

Note that while Amazon does track what you are reading right now on your Kindle, and the pace you are reading it at, it doesn’t yet seem to filter that information into the recommendation engine.

The system isn’t that smart… yet.

How it works today
Instead, you get a cruder form of recommendation, which seems to be mostly based on the time elapsed since your purchase, and is unaffected by something like whether you have finished the original book or not. It just seems to be time-based, rather than personalized or contextual.

Again, the really important thing I’m going to keep stressing: this part of the recommendation engine is completely unaffected by whether Also Boughts are currently appearing on your book’s page. Indeed, the entire recommendation engine is utterly unaffected by Amazon’s tinkering with these Also Boughts.

The mistake people are making is thinking that the importance lies with the Also Boughts themselves, but these are just a visual representation of the system on your page. They are not the system itself.

Also Boughts are just a symbol, if you like.

The true advantages of Also Boughts
Having Also Boughts on your book’s page is nice. They look good – much better than the hodge-podge of Amazon Ads, that’s for sure. Also Boughts bestow a nice dollop of social proof and propel a moderate amount of on-page discovery, as we said earlier. They can help you claw back more of that crucial on-page real estate for you and your books, away from potential distractions like competitors and their Amazon Ads, or anything else that could tempt a reader away from your Buy button.

Also Boughts are desirable in other ways too.

For example, glancing at them on your book’s page is a quick-and-dirty diagnostic tool for your marketing. If they are scrambled, this is often a sign that Amazon has a poor sense of who your reader is, usually because your targeting is wonky and you are sending too many of the wrong people to your book’s page. Which is something you want to avoid.

I get all this. I’m not saying that stuff isn’t important. What I am saying that Also Boughts disappearing is not the crisis it is regularly depicted as. The Amazon recommendation engine is completely unaffected. And that, I respectfully suggest, is the most important thing here.

But the Also Boughts on your book’s page are important in other ways, ones which I do suggest authors should pay attention to.

Also Bought Pollution
Here’s what authors should really be worried about: Also Bought pollution. Because Also Boughts reflect the purchase history of your readers, it’s essential that you only target true readers of your genre.

A common mistake that authors make is getting a lot of friends or family or colleagues to purchase their first book, which is a nice way of showing support, but can really scramble your Also Boughts.

Thanks for nothing, Steve
Let’s say your brother Steve usually reads sword-and-sorcery-type fantasies… but he buys your debut romance novel in support. This simple gesture could confuse Amazon as to who your readers are, hampering its ability to drive new sales. If there are enough Steves in the mix, Amazon may think you have written a very different kind of book. And will recommend you to all the wrong readers.

And if there is one thing Amazon doesn’t like, it’s recommendations which don’t convert into sales. So it will recommend your book less frequently in the future. A key sign that this might be happening to you is if your Also Boughts become scrambled. Watch out for a hodge-podge of books from outside your niche. This is called Also Bought pollution and it can be very difficult to fix.

Whereas if you have clean Also Boughts – where most are from your niche – then you are in much better shape; Amazon is probably recommending your book to the right type of reader.

Two examples should underline just what difference this can make to your book’s fortunes, and your bank balance.

Case Study #1: Escape Velocity Achieved
When I released the second book in a series, it was essential to have the first book in the #1 slot of my Also Boughts. I needed Amazon to recommend Book 2 to whoever purchased Book 1.

To increase the chances of that happening, I ran a sale on Book 1 during the launch of Book 2, which then dutifully appeared in the #1 slot in the Also Boughts. It went on to have an excellent launch; both books continued to feed into the other for several lucrative months.

It doesn’t always go that smoothly.

Case Study #2: The Death Spiral
Several years ago, I was launching a new series and decided to be quite aggressive with Book 1. I priced it at 99¢ and tried to foist it on anyone I could find – including readers of other genres.

Launch week itself went well and I racked up considerable sales. But when the Also Boughts finally kicked in (it takes around 50 sales on Amazon US, less elsewhere), I realized my mistake.

My Also Boughts were filled with off-genre books! Amazon then proceeded to recommend me to all the wrong readers – those who read thrillers and romance.

An impressive launch turned into a dead-cat bounce from which the book struggled to recover. A tough lesson to learn, but a valuable one.

How To Protect Your Also Boughts
Authors shouldn’t panic if Also Boughts get momentarily scrambled. It’s totally normal for Also Boughts to be all over the place for an update or two after your launch. Or after a big spike in downloads, like you might see after a BookBub Featured Deal or a Freebooksy promotion.

Fixing Also Boughts which are permanently scrambled can be very difficult. You need to organize a promotion even bigger than that which scrambled them in the first place. It’s much better to avoid that fate by being disciplined with your marketing.

You should only be aiming your marketing efforts at true readers of your genre; never fool yourself that a broader push outside your genre will work. That fantasy of being a breakout hit like Gone Girl or Ready Player One is dangerous. (And ignores that breakouts tend to dominate their genre before breaking out.)

Reader targeting
This post on the importance of reader targeting goes into that idea in much more detail, but the basic point here is that it’s important to construct marketing plans which work with the Amazon algorithms, rather than against them.

The big takeaway from all this is that you need to find true readers of your niche, and then aim your marketing at them. Exclusively.

Be really careful about “adjacent audiences” as they can be the biggest traps of all. Especially when you are starting out. Don’t target Action & Adventure readers when your novel is at the more literary end of the historical spectrum. Don’t target erotic romance readers when your stuff is sweeter.

Yes, there might be some crossover, but if your Also Boughts get polluted, Amazon can then start recommending you to the wrong readers, which could create a death spiral which it is hard to break.

And the most crucial time to avoid that fate is when your book is first being launched; there is no sales history attached to it yet, and Amazon has no idea yet what kind of book it might be.

Friends and family
When we start out, we’re desperate for sales. We can be overjoyed when Ma purchases our debut, or when a colleague picks up a copy… even though they might be more into mysteries. But that can hurt your book if it happens before you develop a sales history with readers of your genre.

Friends and family can show their support by buying your paperback. Or they can buy your ebook later on. But if your sales are exclusively made up of such purchases at the start, you are courting trouble. Just don’t be tempted into using cheap tricks; they can backfire.

When Gaming The System Goes Wrong
I stumbled across a novel on Amazon some time ago which had shoehorned the phrase “Game of Thrones” into its subtitle.

This is known as title-keyword stuffing. You take what might be a popular search on Amazon and then shove it into your own subtitle… one way or the other. People do this to try and finagle extra visibility with readers searching for something insanely popular, like Game of Thrones.

It’s probably against the Amazon Terms of Service, but that’s not the point here. Rather, it’s about targeting the wrong readers. Because the book using this wheeze was a historical novel. It wasn’t even fantasy.

Now, the ruse didn’t work; this particular book doesn’t appear in the first five pages of searches for “Game of Thrones.” (I gave up after that.) But let’s imagine for a moment it did, and lots of epic fantasy readers had purchased this historical novel.

What would have happened? That’s right, his Also Boughts would have been filled with all the other things that epic fantasy readers buy. Namely, epic fantasy novels. And pretty soon after that, his reviews would be filled with angry readers too.

There is no gimmick that will fix bad Also Boughts. Nor is there one which will fill your Also Boughts with perfect books. You can’t skip the step of crafting a marketing plan. Just make sure it aims at the right readers.

Amazon Has Been Decoded
Amazon Decoded breaks down the secret workings of the Kindle Store in a way that has never been done before. It examines each aspect of the recommendation engine. And shows you how to get Amazon to recommend your book more to readers.

Not only that, it will teach you how to construct marketing campaigns which will trigger recommendations to readers. How to make your book stickier in the charts. And how to launch books in a way that convinces Amazon takes over and does the selling for you.

You can buy it from Amazon, of course. But it’s also available on a wide range of other retailers too. Get purchase links for Amazon Decoded here for your preferred retailer.


---------------


Publishing Short Stories • Your Guide to Making Money
Updated by David Gaughran 22 January 2022. Writing • 47 Comments.

Short stories are fun to write, but can you make money from publishing them? The quick answer is: maybe. But it’s almost certainly harder than you think, and the path to success with short stories can be circuitous.

Let’s begin by looking at the enduring popularity of short stories, including how a surprising number of much-loved movies were adapted from shorter work. But we will also contrast that with how difficult it is to get them published… unless you decide to self-publish your stories.

Another needed dose of realism for authors of short stories: the opportunities brought by ebooks and self-publishing haven’t led to the short story renaissance many hoped – except in certain niches. Nevertheless, some intrepid writers are using shorter work in new and clever ways to get attention, grow their readership, and make some money too.

Here’s your guide to publishing short stories in 2022:

Famous Short Stories
Short Stories, Novellas & Novelettes
Short Story Markets: publishers, magazines, and self-publishing
Selling Short Stories – the marketing problem
Other Uses For Shorter Work: anthologies, box sets, and reader magnets
Making Money As A Writer
Famous Short Stories
In case the bluntness above has taken you aback, keep in mind that less experienced authors often have a very doe-eyed view of how lucrative the short story market might be – perhaps down to the outsized impact shorts have had on popular culture.

Some authors like Edgar Allen Poe practiced the form exclusively. Other famous names count their shorter pieces as some of their finest work, including Flannery O’Connor, Anton Chekhov, Luis Borges, Octavia Butler, Stephen King, Jhumpa Lahiri, Alice Munro, Joyce Carol Oates, Franz Kafka, Shirley Jackson, Lorrie Moore, Charles Bukowski, Alice Walker, William Trevor, and Kurt Vonnegut.

Movie adaptations
A surprising number of much-loved films were adapted from the shorter story: Memento, was originally a short by the director’s brother Jonathan Nolan, even if the movie came out before the literary version got published. 

Others include:

Eyes Wide Shut
The Body Snatcher
A Christmas Carol
Zorro
Stand By Me
Brokeback Mountain
Total Recall
Breakfast at Tiffany’s
The Curious Case of Benjamin Button
2001: A Space Odyssey
The Birds
The Fly
The Invisible Man
Minority Report
The Third Man
Million Dollar Baby
The Illusionist
It’s A Wonderful Life
I, Robot.
If we are allowing a broader view of what a short story is – and we’ll dig into that point presently – then we can also mention A Christmas Carol, Of Mice and Men, Billy Budd, Animal Farm, A Clockwork Orange, The Old Man and The Sea, and Heart of Darkness.

You might reasonably object – pointing out that some of these could be classified as novellas. Let’s get those measuring tapes out. How long is a piece of string?

Short stories, novellas & novelettes
There’s no strict definition of the length of a novel or short story – none that is universally agreed upon. However, a short story is most commonly defined as anything below 10,000 words. But some people say 7,500 words, others say 20,000.

For novels, the preferred length has been traditionally set by publishers and agents. Often in the region of 80,000 to 100,000 words – with big variations across genres and categories. Across time too, as fashions change. On top of all that, most novels are self-published these days, where anything goes.

The old rules around the economics of printing a physical book don’t hold much sway in a digital world; novels have been trending shorter since the rise of ebooks and self-publishing. Various writer organizations now peg the novel as starting at 40,000 words; sounds about right to me. But that does leave a big gap in the middle.

Many will consider anything between 10,000 and 40,000 words a novella. Some can slot in an even more arcane term (novelette) in between the short story and the novella. While others will call anything over 20,000 words a short novel, and anything below it a short story. A workmanlike solution, perhaps, but a neat one.

It doesn’t matter so much.

What do readers expect?
If we are focused on making money, we should be more concerned with what readers want. And what will sell – particularly as supermarkets keep stubbornly charging for food.

Worth noting at this point is that readers rarely use the term novella. Even fewer will have heard the term novelette, outside of literature students or those with authorial ambitions themselves.

Let’s cannonball into the swimming pool of gross generalizations; I suspect the general reader perception of such things would hew closely to our workmanlike framework above:

up to 20,000 words = short story;
20,000-40,000 = short novel;
40,000+ = novel.
Just keep in mind those aforementioned genre variances can be quite extreme. Epic fantasies can breeze past 150,000 words without breaking a sweat. Whereas erotica readers (or wannabe CEOs perusing business books) usually get to the meat faster.

As with everything in this writing life, you can do whatever the hell you like; you’re the captain of your authorship. But if you want to sell you need to consider reader expectations. (And if you want to sell something to a publisher, you must factor in their often Byzantine requirements.)

For our purposes, I’ll explain the best ways to use anything below 20,000 words. But I’ll give some pointers on the rest as well.

Short Story Markets
You pretty much have three options:

sell a short story collection to a publisher
sell a single short story to a magazine
self-publish short stories – either as singles or collections.
Well, you have three options in theory. The odds of the first are astronomical, the prospects of the second aren’t much richer. (Sorry, that’s the truth.) While the third option is certainly in your own clammy hands, it also comes with a plethora of new challenges.

There’s no sugarcoating it, but don’t be dissuaded; there is a path ahead for the adventurous short story writer.

Short Story Publishers
Your dreams might include a short story collection published by a venerable New York House. The reality is that publishers only tend to acquire short story collections from the very most successful of their large stable of existing authors, and even then only in certain genres.

And even then, the publisher and agent would probably rather the author had written another novel instead – such is the respective commercial demand for short stories versus novels.

You don’t have to like it, but this is the harsh truth: an unknown author has virtually no chance of interesting an agent or publisher with a short story collection – especially if they don’t have a string of impressive magazine credits already.

Genre exceptions
The exception here is specialist publishers in certain genres. Tor regularly publishes novellas between 20,000 and 40,000 words. Romance also has several publishers like Harlequin looking for shorter books in certain categories.

Slim pickings abound. But there are other routes to readers, some of which might be a much more profitable use of your time.

Short Story Magazines
Once a mainstay of American life, demand for short story magazines has dwindled considerably since their heyday – as have the relative pay rates, which are essentially frozen since the 1950s.

Publishing a short story in a magazine is a wonderful experience nonetheless. Especially if you are popping your literary cherry, and particularly so if you actually get paid.

Pay is often nominal but getting a magazine credit can be a positive first step at the beginning of your writing career, and certainly was for this particular author.

Magazine examples
For authors of literary fiction, famous magazines like The New Yorker, Paris Review, and The Atlantic might be top of their list, just keep in mind that the bar there is incredibly high and established authors – even famous ones – get rejected all the time.

Respected literary magazines include Ploughshares, Zoetrope, The Antioch Review, and Threepenny Review. Check them out if you write that kind of story.

Writers of humor will already know about McSweeney’s, surely. It remains a popular choice for submitters of short pieces in various forms.

And then various genre magazines round out things, such as Alfred Hitchcock Mystery Magazine and Ellery Quinn Mystery Magazine for all types of mystery, suspense, legal thrillers, and police procedurals. SF/F authors will want to check out the likes of Asimov’s, Clarkesworld, Amazing Stories, and Lightspeed as well.

A handy resource
If you are seeking out more markets, or other genres, then Duotrope should be your first port-of-call. A handy resource for finding markets and tracking submissions.

I submitted to lots myself, back when I was querying agents and trying to get a traditional deal. Firing short stories at any magazine I could find in a desperate attempt to pad out my literary resume. I was rejected by most of them too… so there’s that.

But I did “sell” a short story to a small UK magazine. I use the scare quotes there because no money actually changed hands; instead, I received several comp copies of the magazine in question. A common enough form of “payment” for smaller magazines and newer authors.

However, I subsequently re-sold a version of that story later on, for actual money. It was then published in a hardback collection of the best stories of the year. A real, tangible milestone and something that gave me huge confidence. Especially the getting paid part.

Money for old rope
I self-published that story later on, along with a couple more. An early and valuable lesson in intellectual property rights (and in making money, multiple ways, from a single piece of work).

Feel free to explore the world of magazines if you wish. It can be a very positive experience, as I said. Submitting to magazines can be disheartening and time-consuming. To give yourself any chance, familiarize yourself with the requirements, which can be strict, and particularly with their taste. (Leading to a situation at some where the audience is mostly writers trying to get published.)

Some authors get stuck in a rut. Submitting to magazines forever, and not really progressing. Definitely be aware that there is a whole world of possibility in the world of ebooks and self-publishing which might be more fruitful for you; it certainly was for me.

Self-Publishing Short Stories
Because I am a passionate advocate for self-publishing, you might expect me to say that self-publishing short stories is nothing but sunshine and lollipops. But let me give it to you straight: it’s a tough way to make money. And there are certainly easier ways to make a literary buck, especially in the world of self-publishing. Let’s break it down.

As the publisher, you are responsible for everything. This doesn’t mean actually doing everything yourself – you will most likely be outsourcing specialized tasks like editing and cover design. But you will certainly be handling the marketing yourself, and this is the sticky point for short story writers.

Because there’s an inescapable truth: readers prefer novels. And not just any kind of novel, but a series too. The prospect of writing over 1000 pages when you have been struggling to write 10 might be overwhelming. Let’s park that for a moment and look at the self-publishing short story market in more detail.

Publishing short stories yourself is certainly one way to ensure your work reaches the marketplace of readers. Yes, you have many new things to learn if you want to do it right. But these are skills which will be incredibly useful to you over the course of a writing career.

Warning: publishing is the easy part
Newer writers tend to look at me funny when I say publishing is the easy part. However, out of the three-step challenge facing authors today – writing, publishing, and marketing – it is by far the most straightforward. And experienced self-publishers know exactly what I mean.

Self-publishing in 2022 might seem more complex then when I started but the tools today are far superior. Plus the wild frontier of self-publishing is well mapped out now.

That doesn’t mean there aren’t any pitfalls for neophytes though, so tread carefully.

You can grab my free guide to self-publishing if you want to explore this path in more detail. Just make sure you don’t waste lots of money by using one of those terrible self-publishing companies who generate so many complaints.

I even have a companion video course walking you through book marketing basics. And that’s also free so definitely check it out.

But let’s be clear about something: the real challenge with short stories isn’t publishing them, it’s selling them. Especially in a world overflowing with novels.

Selling Short Stories You Publish
When I was first weighing up whether to self-publishing – way back in 2011 – I decided to test the waters by publishing some short stories. It seemed like a low-risk way to learn the publishing ropes, and so it proved. At least as far as the publishing part went.

Learning all that stuff was so energizing. While one story was with the editor I wrote another from scratch – in a completely different genre, And then I repeated the trick right after.

It was quite the fillip after getting so many rejections from magazines (and from agents regarding my first novel). Indeed, within eighteen months I was a full-time author, living off the sales of my self-published books.

However, the sales from my short stories weren’t contributing a lot to that total. Like most other self-publishers, I soon discovered it was much easier to make money with longer work.

That doesn’t mean I stopped writing shorter pieces though. While shorts aren’t usually money-makers themselves in a direct sense, they really can help you in less obvious ways.

Sometimes short stories can lead you to unexpected places too, as George Berger found out when he queried Amazon’s Kindle Singles program.

the story of how george berger and his goat themed Kiindle Single - Midnight's Tale - came to be
Other Uses For Shorter Work
The inventive world of self-publishing has come up with a number of handy uses for shorter work. Let’s go through them in turn:

Anthologies
I’m sure you are familiar with anthologies. To properly distinguish them from box sets, anthologies are collections of short stories by different authors, usually around a chosen theme.

Authors either get invited to participate by the editor organizing the anthology (often a fellow author). Or they might respond to a call for submissions and get chosen – just like with a magazine. They can even act as the editor themselves and invite submissions.

Anthologies aren’t usually big money-making operations or chances to hit bestseller lists – although that can happen with strong promotion. Usually the aim is giving curious readers a taste of your writing, and leading them across to the rest of your catalog.

Box sets
The difference with anthologies is that box sets are usually collections of novels (or sometimes novellas) by either a group of authors, or just one throughout.

In the case of the latter, you might wonder why an author might make a box set of her work. In particular, why she might sell it so cheaply. Well, the quick version is that pushing older books in this manner can be a powerful and aggressive marketing tactic. Especially with books whose sales have diminished.

Short stories come into the mix through providing bonus content – which can entice readers who already own some or all of the novels in the box set.

Reader magnets
The most powerful tool any author has is their mailing list, And the very best way to boost sign-ups is by dangling a free story as a bonus for joining – often called a reader magnet.

Having an exclusive, free short story or novella as a sign-up bonus can act as a very powerful incentive for readers to join your newsletter, and it’s a particularly popular technique among savvy self-publishers seeking to grow their mailing list.

Short stories or novellas are handy as reader magnets because they can be written much more quickly than novels. However, using shorter pieces also opens up the possibility of writing custom reader magnets – such as a short story featuring a popular secondary character. When you have something which readers are crying out for, and they can only get it by signing up to your mailing list, sign-ups can go through the roof.

This tactic has been the biggest driver of mailing list growth for me – no question. And most other authors with a big mailing list will probably agree with that too.

Making Money As A Writer
If you are focused more on making a living as a writer, there is one inescapable fact: in almost every genre, it’s much easier to sell full-length books, and far easier again if those books happen to be part of a series.

Many writers start off writing short stories, but “graduate” to longer work and then either leave short story writing behind, or just engage in it for personal satisfaction – or perhaps for one of the advanced marketing uses mentioned above.

So if you are plotting out a writing career for yourself, short stories can be useful stepping stones in craft and career terms. But you should also have one eye out for a novel-shaped idea – even better if it is one with series potential. For more on that, particularly as it pertains the world of self-publishing, check out my post on publishing your own books.

Honing your craft
It’s not all about making money though. Short stories can be a fun way to sketch out a new character or a space to test out a high concept, or a new genre for you as a writer. And sometimes the constraints of the form can lead to some powerful work.

It’s quite possibly an apocryphal story, but Hemingway is said to have won a bet among his fellow authors to write a complete story in just six words:

For Sale: Baby Shoes, Never Worn.


-------------------

The Great Ebook Pricing Question
Updated by David Gaughran 3 April 2021. Publishing • 164 Comments.

Do bargain basement prices indicate low quality? Will a 99c price tag actually reduce the value a reader places on a book? That’s a harder question to answer. I think this is true in some cases for some readers, but I also think it’s massively overstated.

It’s hard to sell a book at any price if you have a crappy cover, insipid blurb, wonky formatting, a flaccid sample and tons of terrible reviews (which are all cues to the reader about the value of the product).

But if you have a striking, professional cover, an enticing blurb, clean formatting, a sample which grabs readers right away and lots of great reviews, then you can avoid any negative association with a lower price. Or, at least, the number of readers you will gain through lower prices will greatly exceed any you might lose through such negative associations. Read More…

tags Tagsdevaluing books, ebook pricing, goal-based pricing, maximizing income, price and value, price points, pricing, what price should i set

the five stages of editing a book are beta reading, self-editing, story editing (aka content editing or developmental editing), copy editing, and proofing - and this post will explain them all so you understand how to edit a book, and will help you find an editor too
Editing A Book • The 5 Stages
Updated by David Gaughran 22 January 2022. Writing • 88 Comments.

Editing a book is a complex, multi-part process that is best handled by experienced professionals, even if you are self-publishing, and even if you diligently spend a lot of time self-editing.

There are five main stages to editing a book to the proper standard, although some stages can be combined, repeated, expanded upon, or even skipped, depending on your individual needs (which is a polite way of saying: depending on how much of a dog’s dinner you made of things).

As a regular maker of dog’s dinners myself, I have become intimately acquainted with all five stages and can break down how to edit a book properly, as well as giving you various options depending on your individual needs or budget, and point you to some more resources too.

The five main stages of editing are beta readers, self-editing, story editing (which you may know as developmental or content editing), copy editing, and, finally, proofing. It’s important to note there certainly isn’t one correct way to edit; you will need to develop your own process. You will find advice on that below as well, along with help on finding an editor. Read More…

tags Tagsbeta readers, copy editing, developmental editing, do i need an editor, editing, hiring an editor, proofing, should i use an editor, story editing, types of editing

and the Myth of the A9 Algorithm - amazon algorithms and a9.com
Amazon and the Myth of the A9 Algorithm
Updated by David Gaughran 22 January 2022. Amazon • 13 Comments.

There is more nonsense written about Amazon than almost any other topic because mere mention of Amazon will get you more clicks than anything else — although the “A9 Algorithm” might be the most ridiculous topic of all.

Amazon also happens to be an incredibly divisive subject generally, one of those where little nuance seems to be permitted — and someone writing articles about Amazon tends to regularly get labeled a “shill” or a “hater,” depending, sometimes off the back of the same piece!

Talk of Amazon can also be quite lucrative. The currency of the internet is attention — as I think was once said by Jeff Bezos, although I’m scared to Google it in case I start getting hunted down on every corner of the internet with hyper-personalized ads offering to make me a Kindle Publishing Millionaire or help me build a Drop Shipping EMPIRE.

Internet marketers are not known for their rigorous application of the scientific method. One intrepid black-hatted pioneer will discover a tasty data-morsel, dress it up in distracting finery, and then parade it about as part of a $2000 course. And then a dozen more will riff off that for their own courses and Patreons and books and masterminds and exclusive online workshops and virtual conferences; it’s like the most expensive game of telephone ever.

Sadly, it’s also quite value-free if you like hard facts.

This kind of environment shows some of the drawbacks of the brave new world ushered in by the internet and Google. If search for the phrase “amazon algorithm,” for example, the very first result is an article titled “Everything You Need To Know About Amazon’s A9 Algorithm,” and my BS alarm immediately goes off — use of the singular “algorithm” is a dead giveaway that the person doesn’t have a clue what they are talking about. Use of “A9” in this manner is another. Read More…

tags Tagsa9, a9 algorithm, a9.com, amazon, amazon algorithms, how amazon works, how the kindle store works, kindle store, recommendation engine, recommender systems

What is self-editing? In this comprehensive post by a professional editor, self-editing is explained and you will learn how to edit your own book, but also why it isn't a replacement for professional editing
Self-Editing Explained
Updated by David Gaughran 3 April 2021. Writing • 104 Comments.

Self-editing is the process an author goes through before they send their work to a professional editor; it is not a replacement for editing by a qualified, experienced, professional editor. There is only so much work an editor can do to improve your manuscript in the allotted time, and self-editing enables authors to remove the more obvious errors so that a professional editor can really go to work on deeper issues.

If you want your work to really shine, you must make it as good as you possible can before you hand it over to a professional editor.

And it’s a professional editor’s perspective that I think you will find most useful on this topic, so I have invited along Karin Cox to run through some of the ways that authors can self-edit their work and get it in better shape before they send it off to be copy edited. Read More…

tags Tagscommon writing mistakes, edit your own book, editing, how to edit your own book, how to self-edit, karin cox, self-editing, self-editing explained

#DisneyMustPay Alan Dean Foster Disney Star Wars
Authors Say #DisneyMustPay
Updated by David Gaughran 29 January 2021. Bewares • 1 Comment.

Disney is accused of refusing to pay royalties to Alan Dean Foster in a move that could ultimately affect all published authors, prompting widespread calls that #DisneyMustPay.

Foster wrote the first ever Star Wars novelization, released six months before the initial movie. Star Wars: From the Adventures of Luke Skywalker was based on a screenplay written by George Lucas and its his name that graced the front cover. But Alan Dean Foster wrote the book, which is still in print, and he received royalty checks for it right up until the point that Disney acquired Lucasfilm. Then the checks stopped coming.

Back in the 1970s, Foster was contracted to write a sequel to that first tie-in, working from far less material this time. George Lucas wasn’t entirely sure at that point how successful Star Wars would be and, crucially, how much of a budget he would have to play with – which placed limitations on the kind of story Foster could write. For example, Lucas instructed Foster to keep Han Solo out of the story, because Harrison Ford had not signed on for a sequel yet.

Further writers were hired as the Star Wars franchise grew in popularity and scope, and Alan Dean Foster continued to establish his name. He worked on numerous media tie-ins for franchises like Star Trek, Alien, Transformers, Alien Nation, and Terminator, a whole plethora of standalone novelizations for movies like Krull, The Thing, Clash of the Titans, and The Last Starfighter, and also his own original novels like the Spellsinger series and the many Humanx Commonwealth books. More recently, he returned to the Star Wars universe to write the novelization of The Force Awakens.

In other words, this isn’t some unknown or inexperienced author that Disney is pushing around. But what is Disney playing at? Read More…

tags Tags#disneymustpay, alan dean foster, disney, media tie ins, publishers behaving badly, traditional publishing

How to sell books - header image
How To Market A Book | 2020 Edition
Updated by David Gaughran 29 January 2021. Marketing, Resources • 11 Comments.

Figuring out how to sell books in 2020 means facing a pair of imposing challenges : the multiplying complexity of book marketing and — speaking of things rising exponentially — the global pandemic, which has led to lockdowns, recessions, as well as no small amount of tragedy.

And I want to focus on that second challenge for a moment — before we dive into all the ways that you can get your books into readers’ hands — because there is something rather different about this year.

Writers are generally quite fortunate in that they can work from home and sell books online and, for the moment at least, the digital side of the publishing business looks less exposed than the physical end.

Indeed, retailers and distributors are reporting a boost in ebook sales, and freebies in particular seem especially popular. Anecdotal reports concur, and also seem to confirm that there has been a surge in new entrants to the ebook market — which makes sense when people are stuck at home or less inclined to go browsing in meatspace, for painfully obvious reasons. Read More…

tags Tagsads for authors, book marketing, how to sell books, increase book sales, increase kindle sales, marketing, marketing for authors, sell more books, selling books, starting from zero

Decoding Amazon recommendations
Decoding Amazon To Sell More Books
Updated by David Gaughran 22 January 2022. Amazon • 3 Comments.

In case you read the old, free edition and want to know what has changed, let me make that easy for you: everything. This brand new edition is a full-length book (over 75,000 words) breaking down how the Kindle Store, and how you can seduce Amazon’s giant recommendation engine.

Most importantly, it goes deep on how to profit from that knowledge, showing you exactly how to tweak your metadata and marketing plans to sell more books.

In fact, Amazon Decoded goes one step further than that and hands you a series of strategies and tactics you can use right away – launch plans and backlist promotions to suit your needs if you are wide or exclusive to Amazon, or whether you are looking to maximize income, expand your audience, promote your work on a limited budget, or spend a little more and send a whole series into orbit.

Amazon Decoded also comes with a stellar set of bonus resources, housed on a private part of this here website, which will help you put all this information into practice and raise your marketing game.

Want to sell more books on the world’s biggest retailer? Amazon Decoded will show you how. 

----------------


Editing A Book • The 5 Stages
Updated by David Gaughran 22 January 2022. Writing • 88 Comments.

Editing a book is a complex, multi-part process best handled by experienced professionals, even if you are self-publishing, and even if you diligently spend a lot of time self-editing.

There are five main stages to editing a book to the proper standard. Although, some stages can be combined, repeated, expanded upon, or even skipped – depending on your individual needs. Which is a polite way of saying: depending on how much of a dog’s dinner you made of things.

As a regular maker of dog’s dinners, I have become intimately acquainted with all five stages. In this guide, I break down how to edit a book properly. And you’ll get options depending on your individual needs and budget.

Those five stages are: beta readers, self-editing, story editing (which you may know as developmental or content editing), copy editing, and, finally, proofing. It’s important to note there isn’t one correct way to edit a book; you need to develop your own process. You will find advice on that below as well, along with help on finding an editor.

Beta readers
Self-editing
Story editing
Copy editing
Proofing
Your editing process
Finding an editor
Beta readers
A beta reader gives feedback on early drafts so the author knows what needs to be improved. Writers can be blind to flaws in their own work; they have the whole story in their heads… regardless of what actually made it onto the page. A third-party has the requisite emotional distance to spot such omissions. They come at your book cold, pointing out any deficiencies.

Beta readers often focus on big picture stuff – story problems. Do your jokes hit the mark? Is the core romance believable? Did that big ending work? Are your characters fleshed out? Is the dialog natural? And so on.

Authors use beta readers in different ways – and some don’t use them at all! Although it is quite common to lean on them more heavily when writing your first few books. Then using them considerably less when you are more experienced or dispensing with them altogether.

Some authors will seek feedback from beta readers after every draft, or on particularly thorny sections more than once. Others will only use beta readers at a particular point – like after the final or penultimate draft.

Personally, I have always liked using beta readers after the second draft. Then I use my final, third draft for incorporating whatever feedback resonated with me, as well as general polish. You will have to plot your own path but feel free to experiment with different approaches.

Anyone can act as your beta reader, but remember that fellow authors often make the best beta readers of all. Whoever fills the role, make sure it’s someone willing to give you blunt and honest feedback. It might sting more (spoiler: it does sting more!).

Every beta reader is different, but I usually ask them to focus on story stuff – big picture issues; the actual text will probably be polished anyway. What I really need to know is whether the big twist works, or if my villain is compelling enough.

Finally, remember that you are not compelled to accept all feedback. You are the ultimate arbiter of your work, for good or ill. Developing the requisite judgement is part of the job. However, at the beginning you might benefit from multiple beta readers and listening closely when the same issues crop up.

Beta readers can only help so much; the yeoman’s work of editing a book is next.

Self-editing
Make no mistake: self-editing is not a replacement for professional editing. Nor is it optional for those already planning a professional edit. It’s a compulsory step when editing a book regardless.

An editor is absolutely essential. But even the best editor is limited by the manuscript in front of them.

The more you can improve your manuscript before firing it over to your editor, the better the final product will be. Self-editing will also improve your overall skill as a writer. It will teach you to stop repeating the same mistakes over and over again.

Although if my experience is anything to go by, this just means you will make new and better mistakes. Reader, I’m a work in progress too.

To learn more about this essential process, I strongly recommend you read my comprehensive guide to self-editing. Well, I say “mine” but I invited along a professional editor to write it for you; it’s a bumper post of over 5,000 words of superb editorial advice.

What is self-editing? In this comprehensive post by a professional editor, self-editing is explained and you will learn how to edit your own book, but also why it isn't a replacement for professional editing
Story editing
Story editing is often known as developmental editing (or dev editing for short), or content editing, or even substantive editing.

It’s also by far the most expensive type of editing, unless you wander into the sometimes murky world of book coaches (where you could end up shelling out thousands and thousands of dollars).

Developmental editors look at big picture stuff to do with your overall story: is your hero weak sauce? Is the love interest annoying? How can you fix the giant plot hole in Chapter 7? Does the cliffhanger work? Did readers feel… nothing when Supposedly Hilarious Sidekick died? That kind of thing.

Most self-publishers will use beta readers instead of hiring a developmental editor because they are just so expensive. (Developmental editing is very time-consuming; editors aren’t some form of literary brigand). Authors incorporate feedback from beta readers, in conjunction with doing multiple drafts and several self-editing passes.

Newer authors may be keen on a developmental edit but I recommend exploring options like a manuscript assessment instead. Rather than a line-by-line commentary, you will receive an overall report on the story aspects, replete with concrete examples. And that is usually more than enough to get started on those bigger story issues.

Regardless of your exact approach, what a story edit won’t do is look at language use, or grammar, or mechanics. For that you need a copy edit.

Copy editing a book
Copy editing doesn’t look at story stuff at all, but things like spelling, grammar, and punctuation as well as general language usage and overall style.

Traditionally, there would have been a separate stage of line editing beforehand, focusing on style. However, copy editors serving the self-publishing market understand that these roles are basically combined these days; your copy editor should look at your overall language usage – things like repetition and clarity and clunkiness and simply whether a sentence scans correctly – as well as eliminating errors throughout.

All those successive drafts and beta reads and self-editing can result in sentences which just get all tangled up; a good copy editor should help you straighten it all out. This is the final polish, but not the final step.

Proofing
Proofing is the very last stage in editing a book. After that, your manuscript is locked down. (And feasting may commence).

You can handle this in-house if you have an eye for spotting errors; all that temping I did in college paid off. Do note that authors can be particularly blind to errors in our own work.

I find it beneficial to proof the text in a different context. By this I mean printing the whole thing and taking it to a cafe. Or even quickly formatting my book so I can read it on my Kindle somewhere outside the house. (This is another good reason for authors to buy a Kindle – indeed it’s the original reason I got mine.) You will be amazed how many fresh errors you spot when reading your book in a different format.

Whether you outsource this step or do it yourself, just make sure someone scans the text for typos; they will surely be there, even with the best copy editor in the world.

Designing a process for editing a book
Every writer is different and should develop their own individual process for editing a book.

Some authors will only do one draft but will constantly cycle back and make changes as they go along. Others write multiple drafts, going over the text from start to finish as many times as necessary, focusing on a different aspect each time.

Most typical is probably your classic three draft author, but do whatever works best for you personally; there’s no Right Way here.

You will also see a lot of variation on the editorial side. Some authors use developmental editors, others prefer beta readers (and everyone can use betas at different stages).

My own process
The first draft is what I call the “vomit draft” – sorry! It’s when I try to get the bones of the story down before I lose the will to write it. This tends to be a really rough draft, hence the moniker. No one gets to see it so I don’t really care about unfinished scenes, spelling mistakes, cardboard characters, non sequiturs, or plot holes. I tend to fix all that in the second draft. When finished, I send it off to betas. (Although, I use those far less now that I’m more experienced.) When their feedback lands in my inbox, I incorporate whatever was useful in the final draft.

That third draft is usually my final one, unless the book has serious problems, and it’s all about polish. Making the dialogue crackle. Injecting some voice into those descriptions. Using language more efficiently so the end result is leaner and meaner.

Then it’s all ready for the copy editor. When she’s finished tearing it to pieces (and I’m done moping), I make all the changes that I agree with. This tends to be most of them, once I let that feedback… simmer a little. I handle proofing personally and then, finally, I’m done!

My process won’t necessarily be your process – you will discover what works best for you over time.

Minimum recommended editing set-up
self-edit your book until it’s as good as it can be
hire a professional copy editor and incorporate the necessary changes, and then
proof your manuscript until you eliminate all typos and errors.
Newer authors will almost certainly want to also add some extra TLC at the story stage as well. Whether that’s a full-on developmental edit, a manuscript assessment, heavy self-editing, successive rounds of beta readers, or some combination thereof, those still learning their craft will likely need extra help there.

Finding an editor
Newer authors can be intimidated by the prospect of finding an editor. But the process is not much different from hiring any other professional, whether that’s a plumber or a lawyer.

Whoever you ultimately work with, it’s usually a good idea to do a sample edit first to ensure you work well together. Every editor has their own style; not all author-editor pairs are meant to be. A sample edit can spot issues ahead of time – for both sides – and most editors are happy to do it.

As for finding your own editor, a referral from a trusted source is often best – just make sure it’s an experienced editor who knows what they are doing. But you have a few options here:

Crack open some of the best self-published books in your genre and Google the editor’s name; they will often have a website with rates quoted.
Seek a referral from an author you know. Writers are always happy to share their experiences with editors and other service providers, and recommend the good ones.
Check out my personal recommended list of providers – which you get as part of my free guide to self-publishing.
finding an editor can be a tricky business, but editing a book doesn't have to be stressful - my recommended list of providers will help

-------------

Self-Editing Explained
Updated by David Gaughran 3 April 2021. Writing • 104 Comments.

The topic of self-editing can spark confusion so I’ve invited along a professional editor — one I’ve worked with on multiple books — who will show you how to edit a book yourself. And this is exactly where we run into the first misconception about self-editing because it’s not a replacement for proper editing, but one of the stages of the editorial process.

Self-editing is a concept which can cause confusion but a professional editor is here to set you straight, and you can learn how to edit your own book, but also why it isn't a replacement for professional editing
What is self-editing?
Back to basics
Wordy verbiage
Comma splices
Dialogue dilemmas
Wrong word choice
What is self-editing?
Self-editing is an important stage in self-publishing a book – or preparing one for a traditional publisher. It’s the process an author goes through before they send their work to an editor; it is not a replacement for editing by a qualified, experienced, professional editor.

There is only so much work an editor can do to improve your manuscript in the allotted time, and self-editing enables authors to remove the more obvious errors so that a professional editor can really go to work on deeper issues.

If you want your work to really shine, you must make it as good as you possibly can before you hand it over to a professional editor.

And it’s a professional editor’s perspective that I think you will find most useful on this topic, so I have invited along Karin Cox to run through some of the ways that authors can self-edit their work and get it in better shape before they send it off to be copy edited.

As Karin says herself:

The more you polish your own work when self-editing, the less a professional editor will have to do, which will save them time and save you money.

Karin has a unique perspective: she has considerable experience working for a trade publisher in Australia and is also a freelance editor. On top of that, her own work — both fiction and non-fiction for children and adults, as well as poetry — has been published the traditional way and has been self-published; she really has seen all sides.

I also have first-hand experience of her impressive pleonasm-hunting skills as well as her uncanny ability to turn my sopa de letras into intelligible prose — which is no mean feat. Let’s just say that even after I spent considerable time self-editing, Karin earned her keep.

Here’s Karin with examples of some of the most common language issues she sees in manuscripts, just be aware that your own self-editing will need to encompass story problems as well.

Self-editing: Back to Basics by Karin Cox
Let me start off by stating that there is no such thing as self-editing to a publishable level (at least not without a team of skilled beta readers); I would say this even if my livelihood did not depend on editing.

I scour my own text for errors before I submit it to my publisher, but I am still always surprised at what my in-house colleagues pick up when they read through my manuscripts.

As much as writers attempt to edit their own work, and should for the purposes of enhancing their drafts, I firmly believe they are incapable of doing so as effectively as a professional editor because they lack the necessary objectivity to assess their own writing, even when self-editing with diligence.

The human brain also employs all kind of tricks to convince writers that what they put down on the page is correct (if not Man Booker Prize material).

Taht yuo cna raed tihs at lal is prcaticlaly a mriacle! But such is the power of the human brain. Read a whole paragraph of that and soon you’ll be able to wade through even the most atrocious, unedited drivel and make perfect sense of it.

It is little wonder that most authors — even those who are competent self-editors at a draft level — miss a few transposed letters, misspelled words, homonyms, or misplaced modifiers. It’s all thanks to the human brain’s excellent ability to decode and process what the eyes see.

However, knowing that some Indies cannot afford to employ a professional editor, and that any self-editing you undertake will streamline the editorial process and vastly improve your writing, what follows are five of the most common editorial issues I find in manuscripts that cross my desk.

Many professional Indies will scoff at this list, declaring it small fry — and much of it is — but you’d be surprised how often authors make these mistakes.

Wonderfully florid, flamboyant, descriptive and wordy verbiage
Some ambitious authors regularly find unnecessary cause to heartily and readily pepper their wordy prose with long-winded, superfluous, and exceedingly boring adjectives and adverbs, continually.

See what I did there?

This kind of writing constitutes an adjective and adverb overload. Adjective overload is usually found in descriptive passages, and adverb overload in dialogue. When most of us write, we are relaying a scene we have visualized in our minds.

As a result, we sometimes think that providing all of the rich detail we imagine will make the scene more vivid for the reader, who will feel almost as if they are watching a movie. Unfortunately, it rarely turns out that way.

Reading is a different exercise to watching a movie. Providing the reader’s brain with too much visual or sensory information too quickly can actually befuddle it. Rather than getting a clear picture of what is happening in a scene, the reader gets a fuzzy, out-of-focus mess.

Because they’re not sure what they will need to recall later, readers will be trying hard to process all of that information, which distracts them from the real task at hand — comprehending. The brain just isn’t able to hold all of that visual detail in there while you get to the “verbs” (action), so it just switches off.

Take for instance:

The girl walked into the long, dim, stone-floored corridor lit only by the softly glowing beams of candles in carved pewter candlestick holders that lined the grey stone walls where richly embroidered tapestries danced in the slight draught. The candlelight flickered off her beautiful emerald-green, floor-length dress made out of Chinese silk flecked through with gold, which left one of her pale shoulders bare, revealing the small scar where she had been nicked by Zhung-ze’s katana as a small girl. At the end of the gloomy hall stood a shadowy assassin wearing an ominous black robe and holding a giant, heavy bronze battle-axe engraved with the curious symbols of the Wey Tu Mutc clan.

Phew! There’s a lot going on in this scene, isn’t there? Short answer: not really. The only action is a girl with an interesting scar walking into a candlelit corridor with an assassin at the end — that’s it.

There is a lot of good sensory information in there, but it is obscured by all of the padding and setting. It could be more effectively written as:

The girl’s green silk gown swished on the stone floor as she entered the corridor. Flickering light from candelabras lining the walls made her pale skin glisten, illuminating the small scar on her shoulder where Zhung-ze’s Katana had nicked her as a child. At the end of the corridor, the assassin’s black robes billowed in the draught. He lifted his heavy axe in anticipation. On the bronze weapon, the engraved symbols of the Wey Tu Mutc clan shone in the candlelight.

Even with thirty-four words pruned off the original, I think you’ll agree that the second version provides a clearer visual image of the scene? Of course, the above is far from perfect, but it’s simply to illustrate my point about how self-editing can improve a passage.

Ninety per cent of the longer manuscripts I get sent are rife with adjective and adverb overload.

Some authors (such as Stephen King in On Writing) suggest ditching adverbs entirely and even go as far as insisting there is never any reason to use them. I disagree.

Sometimes adverbs can add spice to your writing while allowing you to remain succinct. Take the following example:

“Because I love her,” Dan said dispassionately.

The therapist said nothing. Removing her glasses, she carefully wiped the lenses with a tissue while waiting for him to continue. When he did not, after several seconds she asked, “Really?”

There are three adverbs in this passage (dispassionately, carefully and really). I believe all of them have some role to play.

If the author were to remove “dispassionately” when self-editing, the reader might well assume Dan’s statement were true, which would remove the subtext of this passage. As it is, the adverb provides a clue that Dan’s words and his feelings are not in accordance.

The therapist “carefully” wiping her lenses helps flesh out her character. Although this is the most dispensable adverb in this example, it underscores that she is a thorough, analytical person. She is not giving her glasses a cursory swipe with a tissue.

[Incidentally, the glasses also provide metonymy here. They represent her clarity of purpose and foresight, her ability to peer more closely into Dan’s thoughts and feelings to see the truth about his life.]

The final adverb here (really) demonstrates that she is aware Dan is not being truthful, even if he does not realise it. It could perhaps be replaced with “Do you?” But I think that “Do you?” would be slightly less accusatory. She is calling him on it, so “really” makes that more clear.

There is a way to recast this passage to remove all of these adverbs when self-editing and still keep some undercurrents in the conversation between Dan and his shrink, but it would require more words.

“Because I love her,” Dan said, knowing he did not mean it.

The therapist said nothing. Removing her glasses, she wiped the lenses with a tissue, careful to cleanse them of even the smallest smear, while waiting for him to continue. When he did not, after several seconds she asked, “Do you?”

Some writers who have bought into the “Adverbs are bad M’kay” school of writing advice will prefer the second example; others will prefer the first. In defense of adverb haters, in many cases adverbs are used as to prop up weak nouns, especially when it comes to dialogue attribution. It is true they can often be removed when self-editing to strengthen text. Following are some common culprits:

“Get out!” he said loudly. (Substitute “he shouted” or remove the attribution as the exclamation mark and context make it clear he is shouting.)
“I love you,” she said softly. (Substitute “she whispered”).
“You complete me,” she said honestly. (This adverb is best removed unless there is a specific reason for doubting her honesty in the first place, e.g. she is a compulsive liar.)
She ran swiftly toward him. (She sprinted, she bolted, she pelted, she tore)
He walked slowly. (He ambled, he loped, he strolled)
He smiled happily. (He beamed or he grinned).
Note: Take care not to use “he/she smiled” after dialogue, e.g. “Whatcha doing,” he smiled. No one is capable of “smiling” words. However, you can insert it as an action following dialogue by using a full stop and capital letter in place of a comma, e.g. “Whatcha doing?” He smiled. Persistently using dialogue tags that are impossible is the mark of the amateur.]

“I hate you,” she said spitefully. Now, I know I’m going to cop some flak for this, but in my own writing I would use “she spat” here. But … but … You said you can’t smile words, so how can you spit them? I can hear you flak-throwers thinking.

My answer to that is: I’m sure all of us have been spat on accidentally at least once when someone we were chatting with was being over emphatic. Also, language doesn’t have to be literal all of the time.

Another option might be:

“I hate you,” she said, enunciating each word.

Or, if you really want to push boundaries:

“I. Hate. You.” She spat out each word.

A worthwhile exercise is to set aside one edit of your draft where you do nothing but go through your manuscript and pinpoint adjectives and adverbs. Assess whether each is necessary and identify the role it plays.

If an adverb is not enhancing meaning, aiding characterization or providing subtext, strike it out. Where an adjective follows a string of other adjectives (especially if you have three or more adjectives in a sentence) delete the weakest one.

Comma splices & other self-editing calamities
Not knowing, where to put commas, some authors believe, that the best way to avoid seeming as if they don’t know, is, just to, put them in, entirely randomly. Do not do this! I’ve read a lot of comments on forums suggesting that commas are entirely subjective. The rules are: there are no rules. Right? Wrong!

While “rule” is too strong a word, there are conventions regarding comma use. Just thwacking a comma down whenever you pause for breath, or whenever you freeze up momentarily when tapping away at the keyboard, is not going to cut it.

Some commas, however, are a matter of personal preference and are called “pausal” commas. Old-school grammarians mostly favor pausal commas; more modern grammarians tend to advocate using as few commas as necessary to achieve clarity.

For some good examples of where NOT to put commas, check out my blog post Don’t Put a Comma in your Ear. For some examples of where commas are necessary, this archived post from Purdue University is handy to peruse when self-editing: Extended Rules for Using Commas.

One regular error is the comma splice, which is also known as a run-on sentence. It occurs when a comma is incorrectly used to join two independent clauses in place of a coordinating conjunction (for, and, nor, but, or, yet, or so) or in place of an appropriate punctuation mark (such as a semi-colon, colon, or em dash).

An example is:

He ran to the bus, it was running late.

Because both of these clauses constitute short sentences — that is, they both have a subject (a noun or pronoun, in this case he and it) and a predicate (a verb form, in this case ran and running) — this is incorrect. This sentence could be correctly written as:

He ran to the bus. It was running late.
He ran to the bus; it was running late.
He ran to the bus: it was running late.
He ran to the bus — it was running late.
He ran to the bus, which was running late. (Perhaps best of all.)
Any one of these is better than the original splice, although the first, second and last are the most standard.

Misplaced modifier madness: a self-editor’s bane
Poor comma usage can also lead to another editorial bugbear: the misplaced modifier. Modifiers are usually adverbial or participial phrases that cause problems when they unintentionally modify something other than what the writer intended.

Groucho Marx once quipped:

“One morning I shot an elephant in my pajamas. How he got into my pajamas I’ll never know.”

The problem with Marx’s joke (or at least part of the problem!) is that the modifying phrase (in my pajamas) is positioned close to the object of this sentence (elephant) rather than to the subject (I), which is what it should be modifying. To make it correct, it would require recasting:

One morning, while/whilst still in my pajamas, I shot an elephant.

[I say while/whilst because it depends on which side of that debate you squat on. Old school is to use whilst; new school would be to go with while, which is now commonly used in both British and American English.]

Participial verb forms regularly create an insidious type of misplaced modifier known as a “dangling participle.” Participle verbs are -ing form verbs, e.g. Running, smiling, dancing, glancing.

When a subject does not immediately follow a participle phrase at the start of a sentence, a dangling participle can occur. Take, for instance:

Glancing up at the clock, the photograph on the mantelpiece caught my eye.

The subject in this sentence is unintentionally the photograph, which is accidentally performing both of the actions — glancing and “catching” (in “caught”, the past participle of catch). To make this sentence correct, it would need to be reworded:

As I glanced up at the clock, the photograph on the mantelpiece caught my eye.

Or:

Glancing up at the clock, I noticed the photograph on the mantelpiece.

You could also rewrite it as:

Glancing up at the clock, my eye was caught by the photograph on the mantelpiece.

But that sounds awkward because even though the subject is now “my eye” the photograph is still performing the action of the verb “caught.”

You might also try:

Glancing up at the clock, my eyes were drawn to the photograph on the mantelpiece.

Or even just:

I glanced up at the clock, but my eyes were drawn to the photograph on the mantelpiece.

The good thing about misplaced modifiers and dangling participles is that, once you have identified them, there are several easy fixes when self-editing. Spotting them in the first place is usually the tricky part! For more on misplaced modifiers, visit this page.

Some adverbs also need careful consideration when it comes to their role as modifiers. Mostly, adverbs are freewheeling. They are the only words that can move around a sentence without throwing too much into disarray. Take:

The cat climbed quickly up the wall.
Quickly, the cat climbed up the wall.
The cat climbed up the wall quickly.
The cat quickly climbed up the wall.
We’ve no issues there; they all make perfect sense, although some are slightly more euphonious. But some adverbs “limit” or constrain the words they are close to. An example is the adverb “only,” which should be placed just before the word it modifies. For example:

Go to school only if you are well.

Not:

Only go to school if you are well

The latter implies that if you are well, you should do nothing else but go to school.

Dialogue dilemmas when self-editing
Dialogue and action scenes are the make-or-break elements of any story. Writing evocative prose is great, but without action and dialogue to drive the plot forward and make the reader feel invested in your tale (and your characters) all you will have is pretty words on a page.

Get dialogue right, and your characters’ voices will ring in your readers’ heads; get it wrong, and your characters will seem flat and, frankly, fictional.

All too often new authors get it wrong.

There are a lot of ways to go wrong when it comes to dialogue. The first is to hardly include any at all! Without dialogue you will likely have an awful lot of “telling” and very little “showing.” I often see narrative passages that tell me how the characters have been interacting.

For example:

When Joe called Nathan into the conference room and told him that Wordsmith Industries could no longer afford to keep him on, Nathan, understandably upset, called him a bastard. Nathan had worked for Joe for fifteen years and angrily told his boss that the company had taken the best years of his life in exchange for a meagre wage and minimum superannuation contributions. Joe, affronted by his employee’s response, immediately told him to get out. As a final indignity, he gestured to Nathan’s uniform and explained that he would need that back, too: it belonged to the company. Nathan stripped off and tossed the clothes on the floor, then called Joe a bastard again, and a coward.

In rare cases, a few brief sentences of this type of exposition can summarize an earlier, “off-screen” conversation (especially if you already have a lot of dialogue, or if it would make for a short, choppy scene). However, it is usually far more interesting to show the reader using dialogue and action, even if it requires more words. Keep this in mind when self-editing your work.

“Have a seat.” Joe gestured towards the conference table.

Nathan, looking worried, took the seat closest to the door.

“I’m afraid it is bad news,” Joe said, sitting at the opposite end of the table. “As you know, Wordsmith Industries has had some financial difficulties this year.” He cleared his throat and smoothed down his greasy comb-over. “You see, we’re going to have to let you go.”

“You bastard! I’ve given fifteen years to this company — fifteen of my best working years — and all for what? A meagre wage and minimum superannuation contributions?”

Affronted, Joe stood. “I was going to suggest you stay on a week to clear things up. But if that’s how you feel, I think you should just get out. Now!” He pointed a trembling index finger toward the door.

Nathan raked the chair back from the table and leaped to his feet.

“One more thing.” Joe pointed to the uniform Nathan wore. “You’ll need to leave that here: it’s company property.”

Scowling, Nathan dropped his trousers and wrenched off his shirt. A button pinged off the conference table, hitting the wall just below the framed print of a mountain peak with the word “Courage” printed underneath. “You really are a bastard!” Nathan spat. “And a coward.” Then he turned and strode out.

(This second example is longer but note that this actually tells us a lot more about both characters than the original “telling” narrative did.)

Expository dialogue
Another dialogue no-no is expository dialogue and you must watch out for it when self-editing. Expository dialogue uses the characters as mouthpieces to relay essential elements of the plot, or information about other characters, which the author wants the reader to know but didn’t want to write as exposition. Let’s use Joe and his wife Gloria as an example.

“Joe, you know that our company Wordsmith Industries is in financial trouble and if we don’t get rid of some employees we’re not going to be able to make the repayment this month and the bank will foreclose on us,” Gloria said as she filled the sink with hot water and squirted in a stream of detergent. “I think you should sack Nathan.”

“Yes, my wife,” Joe answered, “but it’s only because of my gambling problem. If I hadn’t bet that ten grand on that stupid horse named Expository Dialogue we wouldn’t be in this mess.”

“Exactly!” Gloria pulled on rubber gloves and began scrubbing furiously at a saucepan. “And your brother Tim, who lives in London and has four children, should never have asked you for that loan to add on another bedroom. Now look where it has got us.” She pushed a frizzy curl out of her face and huffed in consternation.

Joe sighed.

“And tell Nathan that he needs to leave his green and white uniform, because we paid for it and had it embroidered with the company slogan “We do it better” in yellow cotton thread last year when we sent it out to Carol Bigby’s seamstress services in Castlemaine.”

Of course, there are other issues with this passage, including wordiness and Gloria’s tendency to divulge inconsequential information. But my point is that there is no need for Gloria to tell Joe things he already knows, such as that their business is in trouble (he would know that), or that his brother lives in London and has four kids (he would know that also).

There is no need for her to tell him that the uniform is green and white and embroidered with the company slogan in yellow cotton. There is even no need for Joe to use “my wife” in talking to Gloria, or to tell her about his gambling problem — no doubt poor Gloria already knows about that, too.

What is happening here is that the author thinks she is cleverly slipping in description or backstory without passages of exposition. However, this is equally as expository, and it reeks of authorial interference. It also makes the characters seem contrived and the dialogue seem pointless.

For more about expository characters, check out this page on TV Tropes, but I warn you in advance that clicking on links can result in you being trapped in this very addictive site for hours on end!

Um, err, how’s the weather?
Sometimes, writers do their dialogue a disservice by trying to be too realistic. Wait! Did you say “too realistic”? Why wouldn’t we want our dialogue to be realistic? I can imagine some of you thinking.

The answer is that you do want a level of realism. But rather than making dialogue slavishly realistic by adding all of the ifs, ums, wells, buts, hellos, how are yous and trivial social pleasantries that pepper real conversation, the aim is to create an illusion of realism.

In real life, we chat about the weather, or work, or how we’re doing, before launching into the nitty gritty of a conversation, but in a book, all of that is filler. Omit filler wherever possible; your readers will thank you for it. They won’t sit there thinking, Gee it was rude that Cassandra didn’t ask Ben how his weekend was first thing on a Monday morning before she blurted out that Sarah was having an affair; at least, they won’t if you “hook” them on your story by writing gripping, authentic dialogue and making your characters credible.

Throw the “said book” at them
One of the biggest problems with adverbs is that they can hinder dialogue, especially if used a lot. I’m all for adverbs in moderation, or where they add meaning while keeping writing concise. But try to avoid using adverbs after every dialogue tag.

“Said Bookisms” can also make for amateurish dialogue. Some editors and authors insist that writers should only ever use “said” when attributing dialogue; I don’t. However, I do suggest removing extraneous tags and attributions when self-editing.

If you feel the need to use growled, whispered, screamed, goaded, taunted, muttered, or mumbled on occasion, I say go right ahead, but remember that less is more. If your character is mumbling, muttering, shouting, exclaiming, querying or propounding all of the time, chances are he or she is not distinct or dimensional enough.

When you have just two people involved in a conversation, you can usually get away with just letting them speak, using only their actions to remind the reader which character is speaking.

“What are you doing?” Cassandra leaned over Ben for a closer look. 

“Deactivating the power source.” Ben flipped the switch on the control panel and slipped the back off the unit.

“Why?”

“Why do you think?” He frowned as he poked a screwdriver into the mass of electrical wires.

“I hope you disconnected it from the grid first.”

“From the grid? Now why would I want to do that?” Ben said sarcastically.

If you have a lot of characters involved in a conversation, I’d recommend using actions or “said” in at least 75% of cases, but using other appropriate tags when — and only when — they add meaning and make sense. Also, do avoid some of the more inane Said Bookisms, e.g.

“What are you doing?” he ejaculated.

“I hope you disconnected it from the grid first,” she snorted.

“Let’s go,” she propositioned.

Name dropping
There is rarely a need to have your characters use other characters’ names in dialogue, but authors often do this purely to remind the reader who is speaking to whom.

In conversation, especially in person, we rarely use each other’s names (although we might in some cases, such as if we are angry, emotional or frustrated).

When characters are on the telephone, addressing each other by name, at least to begin with, is standard, but when you are self-editing remember that using names constantly in face-to-face dialogue is distracting for the reader and unrealistic.

All of the above!
An example of some flawed dialogue that incorporates all of these no-nos might be:

“What are you doing, Ben?” Cassandra queried curiously, leaning over Ben for a closer look.

“I’m deactivating the power source, Cassandra,” Ben expounded patiently.

“Why, Ben?” Cassandra questioned.

“Why do you think, Cassandra,” Ben grimaced, as he poked a screwdriver into the mass of electrical wires. “If I don’t, it might go off and blow us all to smithereens. But it’s okay. You and I both know I’ve done this before during the Gulf War, although I am colour blind.”

“Ben, I hope you disconnected it from the grid first,” said Cassandra patronisingly.

“From the grid, Cassandra?” Ben ejaculated forcefully. [Yes, I know! Bad, huh?]

See how artificial and stilted this dialogue has become? There is way too much padding around it, which bogs the reader down. If you recognise some of this padding in your dialogue, it is time to revise.

For action sequences or fast-paced sections of your tale, try to streamline your dialogue as much as possible, keeping tags, attributions and actions to a minimum.

Writing edgy, minimalist dialogue in small chunks — with brief descriptive or action elements in between to avoid dialogue going on for pages without referencing the setting (which is known as writing “talking heads”) — will pick up the pace and keep your readers invested in the action.

Whoops, wrong word
It is very easy to overlook a homonym used incorrectly when self-editing or even a word that is similar to another but has a different meaning. Some of the most common mix-ups I encounter are:

Adverse (hostile or unfavorable) Averse (reluctant)
Affect (verb: to influence) Effect (mostly used as a noun, meaning a result or consequence, e.g. a side effect or a special effect. When used as a verb, it means to result in, e.g. to effect an escape.)
A lot (many or often) Alot (no such word!)
Allusion (an indirect reference) Illusion (a false impression or perception of reality)
Altogether (total) All together (many things close together)
Assure (promise) Ensure (make certain) Insure (take out an insurance premium on)
Breath (noun: inhalation or exhalation) Breathe (verb: the act of inhaling or exhaling)
Continual (recurring constantly) Continuous (never-ending or unceasing)
Dam (a manmade body of water) Damn (profanity)
Discrete (separate/distinct) Discreet (tactful or modest)
Every day (every day) Everyday (adjective: occurring every day or mundane, e.g. everyday clothes)
Fewer (refers to individual objects that can be counted) Less (refers to quantities, e.g.  Fewer people will mean less mess)
Imply (to signify, an action performed by a speaker or writer) Infer (to reason or conclude, an action performed by the listener or reader)
Its (pronoun: belonging to it) It’s (contraction of it is)
Lay (to place something somewhere) Lie (to recline or to fib)
Libel (written form of defamation) Liable (obligated)
Literally (100% true) Figuratively (involving a figure of speech such as a metaphor)
Loath (reluctant) Loathe (detest)
Loose (adjective or adverb: not tight) Lose (verb: misplace) I see this one used incorrectly a lot!
Stationary (adjective: not moving, still) Stationery (noun: writing paper)
Their (pronoun: belonging to them) They’re (contraction of they are) There (adverb: location)
On to (e.g. before I move on to the next point) Onto (preposition: we climbed onto the table)
Passed (past tense verb of pass: to have moved) Past (adjective: relating to a former time or place)
Principle (belief) Principal (adjective: most important; noun, authoritative person)
That (for defining clauses, e.g. words that cannot be omitted in a sentence) Which (for non-defining clauses that provide additional information)
Who (subject of a sentence, e.g. The boy who lived) Whom (object of a sentence, e.g. To whom should I direct my enquiry?)
Whose (interrogative pronoun, e.g. Whose book is that?) Who’s (contraction of who is)
For a more complete list, check out Alan Cooper’s list.

As I mentioned in Part I, these are basic errors and are easily fixed. Issues with plot, plausibility, pacing, and characterisation are more time-consuming to correct.

I hope you have found my guest posts useful as a quick introduction to some of the errors to watch out for when you self-edit. Going through your manuscript several times to check each of these things in isolation will help, as will reading your work aloud, using text-to-speech to listen to the computer read it back to you, reading passages backwards, and deconstructing sentences that sound a little “off” to your ear.

About Karin Cox
Karin Cox is an Australian editor, poet and author and, like many women, is doing her best to be a modern Wonder Woman (minus the cape and the gold lasso). Trained as a professional editor, and with more than fourteen years in the trade publishing industry under her belt, she edits and writes in her “spare time” while being a fulltime mum to her infant daughter and to a black cat with the improbable name of “Ping Pong.”

Final note from Dave on self-editing:
A big thank you to Karin Cox for this comprehensive post. If you are interested in hiring Karin to edit your own book, you can check out her editor site here.

And if you are interested in checking out her written work, she has self-published several books, including the paranormal fantasy Dark Guardians series, and you can check out the first book on Amazon here. Karin also has 50+ traditionally published titles, and you can get more details on those on her site.

As for me, there’s not much I can add to such a comprehensive post, and I hope you all learned more about how to edit a book.

Don’t forget to check out my post on the editorial process, which will explain where self-editing fits in overall, along with beta readers, story editing (aka developmental or content editing), copy editing, and proofing.

Out of all the things Karin covered above — apart from loath/loathe which I can never get to stick plus a worrying tendency towards unintended double entendres which I always seem to slip in (oops) — I think the most common error I make from the above is “talking heads” dialogue.

I’m generally averse to overly florid writing, and have quite a spare style myself, but I can often go too far in the first draft and each successive draft then needs a little more setting and detail to be layered in when self-editing.

I write dialogue much quicker than narrative, and, as I have the whole scene pictured in my head, I rarely notice when I fail to include the necessary minimum of detail/setting to “anchor” the conversation for the reader. Of course, I usually catch that myself when self-editing but often too my editor’s red pen gets busy.

I’ve gotten a little better at self-editing over the years, and one resource that really helped me was Self-Editing For Fiction Writers by Renni Browne and Dave King; it’s excellent.


---------------


Formatting An Ebook: A Step-by-Step Guide
Updated by David Gaughran 11 February 2023. Publishing, Resources • 48 Comments.

You have three options when it comes to formatting an ebook:

Hire a pro
Use a specialized conversion tool
Code the ebook yourself in HTML
This guide to ebook formatting covers the third option – the DIY approach. Here’s an overview of the process:

Preparation
Cleaning Up in Word
Coding in Notepad++
Compiling in Caliber
Testing
And if you are seeking information on the other two approaches instead – i.e. hiring a pro or using a tool – check out my free guide to self-publishing which has specific advice and recommendations on that.

how to self-publishing a book free self-publishing guide publish your book for free
warning
ebook formatting format your ebook DIY
I don’t want to dissuade any of the adventurous types wishing to format their own books but a word of caution is appropriate.

Before we get into this, I’m not a professional ebook formatter. If you want a guide to ebook formatting written by a true expert, then check out Guido Henkel’s Zen of eBook Formatting.

This is my own personal process for formatting an ebook, but it does draw heavily on a series of blog posts Guido Henkel wrote in 2010, which you can still find here. I relied on that series for many years as I built my first ebooks. But over time, I started making more and more notes about where I was deviating from the path Guido had charted out, so I thought I’d now publish that here in case it’s useful for anyone.

After clocking up ten years’ experience making my own ebooks, I do a few things differently – but these are predominantly stylistic preferences, or my preferred best practices in terms of ebook layout, or the odd policy change from Amazon here and there.

A Much Bigger Caveat
You will need a fair bit of patience to get through the DIY formatting process. At least the first time. It becomes much less of a head melter after you first format an ebook successfully, but you will be tearing your hair out that first time. Be warned! That said, I actually love formatting my own ebooks; I find it weirdly soothing.

I can fix errors at the drop of a hat, fiddle with my end matter to my heart’s content, and I could even hang out my shingle as an ebook formatter now, if I needed a side-hustle. It’s a useful skill, if you are willing to work through the many frustrations that will accompany your first efforts.

It might take you a whole day to do this the first time. It could even take longer! But after doing this a few times, you’ll be able to whizz through the process in an hour or less. And it doesn’t take much “practice” to reach that point. That first time is a bear though! You have been warned.

Special Warning for Mac Users
This is written for PC peeps. Don’t swear at me; I don’t have a Mac and you actually have a much better piece of software (and an easier time formatting your books).

Check out TextWrangler, and follow along as best you can – I think it will be easy enough, I’m just flagging it in case some steps are slightly different for you. You should have a much easier time of it than the PC army, from what I hear about TextWrangler.

A Specific Note for Children’s Authors
Formatting children’s books are a special challenge andI don’t recommend the below method. Hiring a pro is probably best here but if you want to explore the specialist approach of formatting your own children’s books then check out this post from Darcy Pattinson.

I also recommend this book from Karen Inglis if you want a full guide to publishing and marketing children’s books, and this guest post she wrote for this here site too.

Preparation
ebook formatting for amazon prep
The process of formatting an ebook takes your manuscript and freezes it in place as-is, so make sure it is edited and error free and that you are 100% done fiddling, or else it’s all the way back to the start of this process again — which you really won’t want to do, believe me.

Make sure your front and end matter is exactly how you want it to appear in the e-book – your title/copyright page, any About the Author page, any links to your mailing list, other books, website, social channels, and a place where readers can review your book. All that stuff should be laid out exactly how you want it to appear to readers. Everything bar the table of contents, which we will handle separately (delete it from your manuscript, if you made one yourself).

Calls-to-Action
All these reader requests are known as CTAs – calls-to-action – and they are crucial to an author’s success. I call this Peak Reader Love moment because a reader will never have a more positive opinion of you than the moment they finish your book – presuming you have done your job as a writer.

Which makes it the perfect time to ask them for something, whether that’s a purchase of Book 2, a sign-up, a review, a website visit, or a social follow.

This latter point is really, really important and will have a massive influence on how successful you are. Read Chapter 6 of my free self-publishing guide – Let’s Get Digital – if you haven’t figured out the best way to lay out all your front matter and end matter, in particular those reader requests.

Let me stress, doing this is really important.

Oh, and I use Word for the second phase, so that’s what I’ll refer to below, but any basic word processor should suffice.

Formatting in Word
formatting an ebook in word
The very first thing you should do is save a fresh copy of your finished, proofed, perfectly laid out manuscript.

This is in case you screw anything up, which you probably will the first time. It’s always good to have a master copy of your edited, proofed manuscript in case of any techno-mishaps.

Because I’m paranoid, I have like eight master copies of everything as well as Dropbox, flash drives, and the most elegant solution of all: repeatedly emailing things to myself. Anyway…

Next, it’s time to conduct some find-and-replace maneuvers. If your manuscript is anything like mine, it might have a mix of “smart” and “dumb” quotes, apostrophes, and ellipses. This will convert them all to “smart” ones and will ensure they are all pointing the right way when we convert them to HTML.

This is really easy to do, just input the quotation mark into the Find box, then select Replace, and input the same quotation mark again. Word is clever enough to figure out which way everything should be pointing. Do this for double quotes, single quotes, and ellipses.

Now you have to replace all italics with HTML code. Go back to your Find/Replace box in Word. Click into the Find part, and then hit CTRL-I which will search for every bit of italicized text in your manuscript. In the Replace box, paste in this bit of code – <i>^&</i> – which will wrap all italics with a bit of HTML. We’ll need that later.

Finally, replace any ellipses with this bit of code – &hellip; – and then you are done with the Word part of proceedings.

However, before we get into wrangling the HTML itself, a quick note on why you might want to build two separate editions of your book… or even more than that, depending on your needs.

A Tale Of Two Editions
All ebook retailers use the industry standard EPUB format these days, although until recently Amazon went its own way, as it often does, and required the use of a different format (MOBI – in case you hear reference to it).

This meant that we had to build one edition of our ebooks for Amazon, and another for everywhere else.

A bit of a pain, of course, but self-publishers love turning lemons into lemonade, and authors quickly discovered huge benefits from making custom Amazon editions of their books, particularly from putting links in the back of the book going directly to the Kindle Store, rather than their own website. Any time you reduce the steps a reader has to take, you increase chances of them buying a book, and of course this made it much easier to complete purchases on dedicated ereaders like the standard Kindles – which only have the most rudimentary browsers.

As such, I strongly recommend making two editions of your book – two separate EPUBS – and putting direct Amazon links in the back of the Amazon edition, and generic links to your website in the back of the edition for all non-Amazon retailers. Note: some retailers and distributors will block your books if they have links to Amazon, so the separate edition is crucial here.

It’s worth the extra step, and it might even be worth creating retailer-specific editions for the more important books in your catalogue, like a permafree or series opener.

Now I’ll show you how to do it.

Formatting in Notepad++
ebook formatting notepad++
Here we move from messing around in Word to using a proper HTML editor – it’s called Notepad++ and you can download it free. It’s PC-only, but Mac users have access to an even better piece of software called TextWrangler.

Before we dive into Notepad++ we need to clean out all the hidden gunk in Word because a typical file has all sorts of hidden HTML, which is what can make your ebook go screwy if you just try and upload a Word file to Amazon (please never do that).

Select your entire manuscript in Word, and then copy and paste it into a “dumb” word processor like (regular) Notepad. This will strip out all the hidden HTML code. It will also remove things like italics, which is why we wrapped those sections in code first.

We are going to dump this “clean” manuscript in our HTML editor in a moment, but first we’ll create a “shell” in Notepad++ to apply some styles to this blob o’ text, so save that file in Notepad for now and open Notepad++.

Applying Styles
Once you have formatted your first book, you will have your own “shell” that you can apply to all future books, but you can borrow mine and tweak it as desired so that you style your ebooks the way you like and then just copy that every time you publish a new book.

This is what my shell looks like. I’ll explain everything in a minute. Sorry if this is difficult to read, it’s hard to display HTML code on a webpage because HTML is the code that tells a webpage to do things! I also want to make sure you can copy and paste this and use it yourself.

(Fun trivia: ebooks are essentially a series of HTML pages with a big ‘ol wrapper around them.)

<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd">
  <head>
    <style type="text/css">
      html, body, div, h1, h2, h3, h4, h5, h6, ul, ol, dl, li, dt, dd, p, pre, table, th, td, tr { margin: 0; padding: 0em; }
p
{
  text-indent: 1em;
  margin-bottom: 0.2em;
}
p.noindent
{
  text-indent: 0em;
  margin-bottom: 0.2em;
}
p.head
{
  text-indent: 0em;
  font-weight: bold;
  font-size: 1.5em;
  margin-bottom: 0.2em;
}
p.head2
{
  text-indent: 0em;
  font-weight: bold;
  font-size: 1.25em;
  margin-bottom: 0.2em;
}
p.chapter
{
  text-indent: 0em;
  font-weight: bold;
  font-size: 2em;
  page-break-before: always;
  margin-top:3em;
  margin-bottom:1em;
}
p.centered
{
  text-indent: 0em;
  text-align: center;
}
span.centered
{
  text-indent: 0em;
  text-align: center;
}
</style>
</head>
<body>

***INSERT BOOK HERE***

</body>
Decoding The Noise
OK. What does any of that mean? I honestly don’t know what all of it means, but I do know that I shouldn’t mess with the first seven lines or Bad Things Happen. The rest of the stuff there is the styles that we totally will play with.

For example this bit of code here is your standard paragraph style:

p
{
text-indent: 1em;
margin-bottom: 0.2em;
}
It just has two elements, one inserting a small indent, and the other creating a small gap underneath the paragraph. You adjust those settings (i.e. 1em and 0.2em) if you like but I think they are good as is.

This next style is for when I want a new paragraph, but don’t want an indent – i.e. after a chapter or scene break or a list. So I called it p.noindent – but you can use whatever you like. You can see it’s the exact same as the paragraph style, just with a text-indent value of 0.

p.noindent
{
  text-indent: 0em;
  margin-bottom: 0.2em;
}
The one after that is to make nice big headings.

p.head
{
  text-indent: 0em;
  font-weight: bold;
  font-size: 1.5em;
  margin-bottom: 0.2em;
}
And then this one is for sub-headings, so a little smaller. You can see I’ve adjusted the font-size value their slightly. You can tweak this if you like.

p.head2
{
  text-indent: 0em;
  font-weight: bold;
  font-size: 1.25em;
  margin-bottom: 0.2em;
}
This style is for a new chapter – this applies a big heading, some space above and below the chapter heading, and also flags that it’s a new chapter for when we auto-compile the table of contents later.

p.chapter
{
  text-indent: 0em;
  font-weight: bold;
  font-size: 2em;
  page-break-before: always;
  margin-top:3em;
  margin-bottom:1em;
}
Finally, all this code is just to center text. Make sure to include all that span code – this is for Apple devices which need specific instructions to center anything for some reason. THANKS STEVE JOBS.

p.centered
{
  text-indent: 0em;
  text-align: center;
}
span.centered
{
  text-indent: 0em;
  text-align: center;
}
How It Looks In Notepad++
Just so you can see it in “action” here is a screenshot of the HTML code from Notepad++ of my book Following – from the start of the <body> tag to the end of the second paragraph of the introduction – just so you can see how we actually apply the styles in the manuscript itself.

ebook formatting format your ebook DIY 
Don’t worry about the other bits of code just yet – we’ll get to that. I just wanted to show you an example of what it looks like in Notepad++ in the finished version, when you’re done massaging the text.

Back To The Shell
Let’s return to that “shell” I gave you up top again, this time with a template inserted for your own copyright/title page that you can adjust as needed. I’ve just inserted some square brackets where you need to fill in your own author name, editor, book title and so on.

You can copy and paste this into your blank Notepad++ file so you have your own “shell” to dump your manuscript into.

<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd">
  <head>
    <style type="text/css">
      html, body, div, h1, h2, h3, h4, h5, h6, ul, ol, dl, li, dt, dd, p, pre, table, th, td, tr { margin: 0; padding: 0em; }
p
{
  text-indent: 1em;
  margin-bottom: 0.2em;
}
p.noindent
{
  text-indent: 0em;
  margin-bottom: 0.2em;
}
 p.head
{
  text-indent: 0em;
  font-weight: bold;
  font-size: 1.5em;
  margin-bottom: 0.2em;
}
p.head2
{
  text-indent: 0em;
  font-weight: bold;
  font-size: 1.25em;
  margin-bottom: 0.2em;
}
p.chapter
{
  text-indent: 0em;
  font-weight: bold;
  font-size: 2em;
  page-break-before: always;
  margin-top:3em;
  margin-bottom:1em;
}
p.centered
{
  text-indent: 0em;
  text-align: center;
}
span.centered
{
  text-indent: 0em;
  text-align: center;
}
  </style>
  </head>
  <body>
<p class="centered"><span class="centered"><strong>BOOK TITLE</strong></span></p>
<p class="centered"><span class="centered"><strong><i>Subtitle If You Have One</i></strong></span></p>
<p class="centered"><span class="centered">[Author Name]</span></p>
<p class="centered"><span class="centered">Editor: [Name]</span></p>
<p class="centered"><span class="centered">Cover: [Name]</span></p>
</br>
<p class="centered"><span class="centered">First Edition published [insert date]</span></p>
<p class="centered"><span class="centered">Copyright &copy; 2020 [Author Name]</span></p>
<p class="centered"><span class="centered">[EPUB] Edition</span></p>
<p class="centered"><span class="centered">This ebook is licensed for your personal enjoyment only and may not be re-sold or given away to others. Thank you for respecting the hard work of this author.</span></p>
*** INSERT BOOK HERE ***
</body>
See that bit at the bottom where it says ***INSERT BOOK HERE*** like some kind of demented litbot? This is where you will paste your gunk-free, prepared manuscript which you saved earlier in (regular) Notepad.

Massaging The Text
Now cut and paste the whole manuscript again from (regular) Notepad into Notepad++ right where my “shell” tells you to insert the book – which is inbetween the <body> and </body> tags and below all the copyright guff.

Make sure not to remove these tags! The second one especially is easy to accidentally delete.

With your manuscript pasted in, now it’s time to massage the text into place. I find this part weirdly soothing – like bringing order on a chaotic world. Which makes me sound like Judge Dredd. Hey, if the helmet fits…

Before we go any further, save your Notepad file.

I usually build the Amazon EPUB edition first, make sure it’s error free using a free online checker, and then build the EPUB for the non-Amazon retailers.

So I save this first file as BookNameAmazonEPUB.html and work from there.

At this point, you should open a regular web browser, like Chrome or whatever you use to surf the internet.

Load that BookNameAmazonEPUB.html file, or whatever you have decided to call it, into your browser. It will look like a mess right now, but we are about to massage it all into place and will periodically reload this window to check on our progress.

Keep Checking In Your Browser
For example, here’s what the opening to my book Following looks like when viewed in a web browser – close enough to how it looks on an e-reader, and a useful way to check if you mess anything up as you go.

ebook formatting format your ebook DIY
You can view a few of the styles we defined in our “shell” above – the regular paragraph style, the noindent paragraph style, the chapter style, and the centering style.

Yours won’t look quite so neat… yet. So let’s get on that now.

We are going to run a series of Find-and-Replace operations, just like we did with Word in the second phase, just a lot more of them. Before that though, we need to do two things.

First, hit CTRL-F to bring up the Find-and-Replace menu in Notepad++ and make sure Regular Expressions is ticked. Search for ^(.+)$ and replace with <p>\1</p> to apply our paragraph style to each paragraph.

Second, before we continue with the rest of our Find-and-Replace tags, we must do something quite important: comb the entire text for any stray italics tags or paragraph tags – if we don’t do that now, it can cause huge problems for us later. (BTW, checking the HTML file in your browser window periodically can help all through this entire phase.)

Okay, we are finally ready to bash this into shape with a series of Find-and-Replace operations.

You might have noticed a weird question mark symbol dotted through your manuscript when viewing the HTML file in a web browser. These related to various special characters – like em dashes, quotation marks, apostrophes and so on – and we need to replace them with something called “HTML named entites” so they render properly on a Kindle or an iPhone or a computer or whatever your reader happens to be using.

HTML Named Entities
The most common HTML named entities are copied below, but if you have something else weird, like a character with an accent in their name or something, then check this more complete list. (Note: use right single quote for your apostrophes.)

 	 	NAMED ENTITY
em dash	—	&mdash;
en dash	–	&ndash;
left double quote	“	&ldquo;
right double quote	”	&rdquo;
left single quote	‘	&lsquo;
right single quote	’	&rsquo;
copyright symbol	©	&copy;
ellipse	…	&hellip;
Named entities for formatting an ebook
I’ve included the HTML named entity for ellipses above, but you might remember we already handled that in the Word document earlier – this is because doing a Find-and-Replace on a period symbol can make things go very wrong!

Now need to replace all special characters in your document with HTML named entities like those above. For example, to replace all your em dashes, hit CTRL-F (make sure Regular Expressions is still ticked) and then Find-and-Replace the em dash symbol — with &mdash; – and you can just let it Replace All rather than going through them individually.

Repeat that process for all your quotes, apostrophes and any other special characters. Check your work periodically in your web browser.

Once all that is done, it’s time to apply all those paragraph styles – this is where it really starts coming together and it’s fun to view it take shape in a browser as you go (also recommended so that you know where and when you went wrong, as you invariably will at some point).

You might remember we wrapped the entire text of your book in regular paragraph tags. Now we need to go in and change some of those to various styles like chapter, noindent, and so on.

Find-and-Replace
This step takes the longest, but I find it kind of fun. (I do not promise you will find ebook formatting fun!) This is what you need to do:

Replace the <p> tag in all chapter headings with <p class="chapter">
Where you have a chapter opening or the start of a new scene after a scene break, or anywhere else you want to commence a paragraph without an indent, then replace the <p> tag with <p class="noindent">
Any headings, you need replace the <p> tag with <p class="head">
And so on for centering, sub-headings, or any styles you added yourself.
Remember to regularly check your work as you go in a browser. This step can take forever the first time you do it, but you can get super fast with practice (for example, I keep my code tags in a little (regular) Notepad doc while doing this and just turbo my way through pasting them where needed).

The reason why it’s important to check in a browser periodically is that if you take a wrong turn you can undo the last step or two and identify the problem. It’s usually a misplaced HTML tag (or a missing one to close what you were doing, like turning off italics, or not closing off a paragraph with a </p> tag).

To give you some reference point, here’s a snapshot of what a bit of Following looks like in Notepad++.

ebook formatting format your ebook DIY
And then here’s that same section previewed in a web browser.

ebook formatting format your ebook DIY
Along the way, you might need to use additional HTML tags. For example <strong> will bold a text – just remember to close it off with </strong> when you want to stop bolding. </br> will give you a carriage return with no text – useful for scene breaks. You don’t need to close that tag off – one of the few standalone tags.

Simple HTML Tips
Keep in mind that you can’t use some HTML tags in an ebook – not everything will work. But you should be covered for most things above. One extra thing you will definitely need is learning how to build a clickable link.

This is how you do a link. This is how you do an image. And this is how you do an image link. That site is wonderful for learning HTML, by the way.

Once you are done massaging everything into place – and that end matter can get a bit fiddly, but persevere until it looks fab – then it’s time to open up Caliber and actually compile your finished ebook so it’s readable by and device. Exciting!

Don’t worry, we haven’t forgotten about the non-Amazon edition – we’ll circle back and build that very quickly once we have finished and tested the Amazon edition.

Formatting in Caliber
formatting an ebook with caliber
Caliber is the tool I recommend for compiling ebooks. You can download it free here for PC or Mac.

While that’s downloading, do one last check of your HTML file for errors – both in Notepad++ and in a web browser for errors. Test all your links, look for any unconverted special characters, and make sure you’re happy with your front and end matter as no changes can be made once you upload your file to Caliber without restarting the whole process from this point onwards.

Now that you have been warned, open Caliber.

Step-by-Step
Click Add Books in the top left and select your finished HTML file.

Click the next button along – Edit Metadata – and fill out all the fields. This will attach some metadata to your book, but I don’t think any of the retailers pay it any attention. I always do it just in case though.

Make sure you use a small file size for the cover. This greatly reduces your overall file size, which means you make more per copy sold on Amazon. This could cost you thousands of dollars over time if you don’t keep your file size low. I use a low-res cover 600px wide, and reduce the file size using this handy free tool. When finished, click OK.

Hit the next button – Convert Books. This is the meat of the ebook formatting process with Caliber. As mentioned, I do the Amazon EPUB first, and then if the file passes validation, I go back and do the non-Amazon EPUB.

Select EPUB from the top-right menu before you do anything else.

Ignore everything except for what I tell you. There are some crazy settings in here and I have no idea what they do… except break everything.

Click Structure Detection in the menu on the left-hand side. At the Chapter Mark dropdown, select NONE. Then, in the field headlined “Insert Page Breaks before…” delete that jumble of text.

Click Table of Contents, the next one down in that left-hand list. In the field marked “Level 1 TOC” insert the following text exactly: //h:p[re:test(@class, "chapter", "i")]

Click EPUB Output and check the box “Preserve Cover Aspect Ratio.”

Finally, click OK in the bottom right-hand corner to compile your ebook! This takes a minute, so scratch your nose.

Click Save To Disk in the top menu bar.

Validating Your EPUB
Open your EPUB, page through it, look for errors – especially check things like the links in the end matter etc. If you don’t have any free app on your computer to read EPUBs, Adobe Digital Editions is both good and free.

Once you have given the file a once over with human eyes, and are happy with the result, you need to give it a once over with the less forgiving eyes of a robot. Validate your EPUB here.

If it returns errors (or if you spot something during your more human review), I’m afraid you will have to open your HTML file in Notepad++, find them and fix them (not always easy, but persist!) and then repeat the above steps to compile the book in Caliber again.

If there are no errors, proceed to compile the the non-Amazon EPUB in exactly the same way as you just did for the Amazon EPUB.

Just remember to take out those links to Amazon! Other retailers can block your book if they detect them – they can be super sensitive to anything Amazon.

That’s it! You have files for all the ebook retailers now… and now you also know ebook formatting!

Testing
ebook formatting - testing 
You might have done a lot of testing along the way, but I recommend you do a little more now too, especially important when you are just learning how to format. I like to side-load the Amazon EPUB to my Kindle and page through it. You can also use the various online previewers at the various retailers to check your work.

I recommend being thorough before actually publishing something, and that goes triple for your first rodeo. Once you are happy, upload and enjoy the fruits of your labor!

formatting an ebook - Questions
Pop your questions on formatting an ebook in the box below. I’ll get a ping right away, and answer you once I’m done with this ice sculpture.


---------------


7 Expert Tricks To Improve Your Author Newsletter
Updated by David Gaughran 1 January 2026. Marketing • 17 Comments.

There is so much more you can do with your author newsletter these days beyond simply telling your fans that you have a new book.

Email isn’t just good at bringing you new readers, it’s uniquely good at deepening engagement with your audience. These tricks won’t just help you increase the responsiveness from your list – they’ll also help you make some cold, hard cash too.

Before we dive in to these next-level strategies, please note this is primarily intermediate/expert level stuff. If you are less experienced – or less convinced of the merits of email marketing, like contacting your readers regularly and using onboarders etc. – then read this post on the power of email marketing instead.


1. On The First Date, Take It Slow
Authors are getting better at offering strong enticements to sign up – commonly known as magnets or bribes or sign-up bonuses – as well as deploying automated sequences to further warm-up new subscribers. But sometimes we can be a little… overeager.

Your first priority should be to keep the promise that you made to the reader, which means ensuring
the subscription happens smoothly and they get their free ebook.

If you overload the first emails the subscriber receives, you might get dropped into Promotions or *gasp* Spam. If you’re lucky the subscriber will email you complaining they didn’t get their gift. If you’re lucky. Most probably won’t even bother complaining which means you’ve just lost a sign-up.

Don’t hit new subscribers with ten different links to all your Amazon listings and Facebook Page and Twitter account and Website and BookBub profile… at least until you have confirmed their subscription, and they have received their sign-up bonus.

There might be a little delay if you deliver your reader magnet as the first email in your welcome sequence, rather than in the confirmation email, but there are all sorts of advantages to doing so, which you will know all about if you have read Newsletter Ninja – which you really, really should.

Besides, the more CTAs you roll out at once, the more diluted the response will be. Always focus on the most important and, here, that’s getting the relationship off to the right start by keeping your word.

2. Always Test Deliverability
Getting your author newsletter into reader inboxes is important and making sure that initial welcome sequence does so is absolutely critical. Never leave it to chance. Not only should you minimize links (and images) in those first couple of emails, you should also test to ensure those emails aren’t dropping into Promotions or Spam.

Sign up to your list under an alternate Gmail address – specifically: one that you have never had any email history with – and send your test emails to that address instead of your own. If they drop into promotions, then you need to fiddle with that email before letting it out into the wild, whether that’s reducing images, taking out a few links, dropping some buttons, or taking out any words with a high spam score in your message or, in particular, the subject line.

3. Use Contextual Magnets
Reader magnets are great! Sign-up bonuses of any kind always act as a strong hook for your author newsletter, and any downsides (such as attracting freeloaders) can be deftly handled during your welcome sequence.

But not all reader magnets are created equal and sometimes it pays to think beyond a simple one-size-fits-all approach. Some bribes will appeal more to existing fans, others will do a wonderful job of bringing in new readers.

Savvy authors often have a different sign-up bonus depending on who exactly they are trying to entice on to their list. Is this reader new to me? Or is this a long-term fan who just hasn’t signed up yet?

It might be easier than you think to differentiate – just look at the entrypoint. Someone coming in via a giveaway is most likely to be a new or otherwise cold sign-up. At the other end of the spectrum, a sign up at the back of a book is most certainly a warm lead, an existing fan, and a different magnet could be optimal here. It’s more work, sure, but it might also give you a second bite of the cherry, getting some highly valuable sign-ups from those who weren’t enticed the first time around.

This is just the most obvious way that you can have contextual magnets. Non-fiction authors can really go to town here, offering all sorts of content upgrades around their site, from worksheets and checklists to video guides and ebooks, there are many possibilities. But the format isn’t as important as tailoring that piece of content to where it appears. This might sound like a lot more work, but a super customized piece of content doesn’t need to be very long if it hits the mark.

All this can apply to fiction more than you might assume. I’ve seen authors offer deleted scenes, alternative endings, spaceship schematics, case files, maps, and recipe books based on their stories.

4. Red Hot Affiliate Action
Warning: this is sexy and dangerous. There’s a lot of potential money to be made from affiliate schemes, but all that glittering gold can blind you to the point where you start to view your list as a cash cow… and then proceed to milk it dry. I’ve seen authors with huge lists completely destroy them after they had basically lost respect for their readers and just viewed them as numbers and dollar signs. Each of those email addresses is a real flesh-and-blood person and the second you forget that you have already lost.

There are ethical and legal concerns which you should educate yourself on with regard to affiliate schemes but the short version is if you are completely transparent about any affiliate relationships you may have, you won’t go far wrong (legally or ethically). The FTC recently made its guidelines even clearer on this stuff: you must be transparent and explicit.

One thing that can trip you up regardless are Amazon affiliate links. You can’t use them in email. This is incredibly dumb, but Amazon considers email to be “offline communication” and your affiliate account could be terminated if you drop affiliate links in your emails – and Amazon seems surprisingly sensitive to the practice, especially if you consider much more egregious sins it routinely ignores. Just don’t risk it.

Anyway, this topic is probably of limited interest to most of you. Fiction authors can monetize their newsletter in other ways by selling book-related merch (I know some authors who make crazy money with this), but affiliate schemes are usually only useful for writers of non-fiction.

If only there was some magical way of showing certain people specific niche content, and keeping it hidden from the rest…

5. Dynamic Content Blocks
If you don’t know what tagging and segmentation are, then read this excellent guide from MailerLite. Note: that is an affiliate link. Not only am I an affiliate for MailerLite, and use MailerLite personally, I strongly recommend that you use them too. I switched my fiction list to MailerLite in 2019 and it has been a very positive experience.

Anyway, even if you prefer another reputable and effective email service like Kit (which I have used for my non-fiction list since 2022), I still recommend perusing the MailerLite help pages regularly. They have a ton of guides like that on every imaginable email topic, with lots of video content too which makes it all very digestible. And a lot of it is general best practices which apply no matter which service you use. They are smart digital marketers.

Those who are with MailerLite can enjoy a cool new feature. Dynamic Content Blocks take segmentation and tagging to a whole new level.

The way segmentation and tagging works is already pretty cool. For example, if your erstwhile subscriber Alice Audioslave clicks on the Chirp link in your announcement of a new release, you can automatically tag them in your database as an audiobook listener.

Then the next time you want to distribute some audio ARCs, then you can specifically email the people who clicked on that link with an ARC offer. The possibilities really are endless with this, but you get the idea. You can set up separate segments or groups for “audiobook listeners” or “Barnes & Noble customers” or “readers in Australia” or whatever takes your fancy.

Some authors get very fancy with this and tailor their new release announcements, sending separate emails to their Apple customers, with Apple specific links and branding, or push their launch email out to Australian subscribers at 11:00 am in Sydney, instead of the middle of the night.

Real whizz kids take it to another level again and have all sorts of conditional automations which only kick in if subscribers take certain actions (usually if a reader clicks on a certain link).

That’s all well and good, but Dynamic Content Blocks take this one step further again, and allow you to send the same email to everyone but have different bits of content appear to any given subscriber, depending on how they are tagged. Which means that, in our above example, our diligent author would only have to send one email to all their subscribers, but the system would adjust the content to reflect their interests and preferences.

Email converts like nothing else, but you can push those rates even higher by having the content dynamically reflect readers’ interests. This is getting pretty fancy, people.

6. Classy goodbyes
Breaking up is never easy and it’s usually best to end on good terms. Even the most entertaining authors will get unsubscribes, but you shoud know that this is also an opportunity.

It’s not just generic sign-up forms and confirmation emails which can be customized but unsubscribe pages too. That’s right!

“But they don’t love me anymore,” you might protest, not without grounds either. Here’s the thing, though: not all unsubscribes are quitting because their love has turned to bitterness and hate over you repeatedly squeezing the toothpaste from the middle like some kind of monster; some people are just overloaded with email at that moment. Others are just… hungover.

For example, for my non-fiction author newsletter which goes out weekly (rather than monthly) my #1 unsubscribe reason is that my emails are too frequent. I don’t mind – it is supposed to be frequent! Plus, I know this doesn’t mean they hate me or my newsletter and will never buy a book from me again; they’re just swamped right now.

Even for people with the more standard monthly author newsletter, a handful of subscribers can still, at times, feel overwhelmed. It’s not about you per se but often down to the overall volume of emails they receive. Plenty of those people may still interested in you and your books, they just don’t want to be on your list right now for whatever reason.

Don’t take it personally and don’t slam the door in their face! Customize that unsubscribe email so it isn’t so cold and impersonal.

More importantly, give people the opportunity to follow you in more low-touch ways, like on Amazon or BookBub for New Release Alerts only, or on Facebook for bite-sized newsy bits, if that’s more their speed. They may come back to you – and in my experience, that happens more than you might think. Another reason to keep things friendly.

That’s just the basics. There are so many more things you could potentially do with an unsubscribe page, and MailerLite goes through just some of the possibilities here (affiliate link, of course). Particularly useful and relevant might be the example from USA Today Bestselling Author Kelsey Browning, but never be afraid to import best practices from other industries!

Getting specific advice on best practices with your author newsletter is important, of course, but also keep in mind that the publishing business tends to be a couple of steps behind the rest of the world.

7. Get Help With Your Author Newsletter
Don’t worry if you aren’t in a position yet to implement advanced techniques like this, it’s great just to be aware of some of the things which are possible with email. Then you can start working towards them.

Here are my recommended resources for getting to the next level with your author newsletter:

Read This Book
Newsletter Ninja – so good, I’m mentioning it twice. Buy it, read it, do what Tammi tells you.

Listen To This Speaker
Erica Ridley is my other favorite email expert. She often gives talks at conferences like RWA and NINC – get ready to take a lot of notes. I’m not even joking when I say my phone was overheating after one of her workshops.

Make this hummus
Nothing to do with author newsletters, as such, but it is tasty and delicious.

Use this email service
You need to use a specialized service to deliver your author newsletter. MailerLite is my preferred provider. It is what I use for all three of my pen names and I’m very happy with it indeed. That’s an affiliate link, of course, but feel free to do your own research.

There are a million articles out there comparing all the different services and you can read why I chose MailerLite here and check out my further thoughts after I made the move in this guide to moving from Mailchimp to MailerLite. Short version: it’s powerful, easy-to-use, very competitively priced, and the customer service is excellent.

As I said above, you might consider an alternative like ConvertKit to be more suitable to your needs – especially if you get really deep into automations (affiliate link) – but MailerLite is hardly basic on that front and more than suffices for my needs.

I’m also very comfortable giving MailerLite a general recommendation as it has a pretty stellar free plan too where you don’t pay until you reach 1,000 subscribers. Companies like Mailchimp might sound a better deal but if you look at the small print most of the features are hobbled on their free plan these days.

Plus, Mailchimp has gone this direction recently – not good, and why I left them after eight years. I rather suspect that was a factor in MailerLite doubling in size last year. Oh, Mailchimp…

Check out this WordPress theme
You need a clean, fast-loading landing page to collect email addresses for your author newsletter. I always recommend WordPress and my current theme – which I cherish, love, and adore – is a custom version of Parallax for Writers by GoCreate.Me which is designed by indie author Caro Bégin – who perfectly understands our specific needs – and does so many nifty little things under the hood.

Use this service to deliver your magnets
Speaking of nifty, BookFunnel is the best at delivering your reader magnets. Not an affiliate link, just an awesome company which puts authors first and specifically designs its products based on our needs, pain points, and feedback.

Aside from being best-in-class at getting your free ebook onto reader devices (a tricky enough technical challenge), and handling customer service for you (anyone who had a reader magnet several years ago before BookFunnel existed can share their pain!), BookFunnel has lots of cool additional features which I recommend exploring.

Particularly relevant here is that BookFunnel is very flexible and can allow you to set up multiple funnels with different entrypoints with as many different magnets as you like – and it integrates neatly with MailerLite too.

One last thing…
I hope you enjoyed this post! I just wanted to let you know that I send out exclusive content every Friday to my mailing list subscribers.

I talk about the latest tricks with Facebook Ads or BookBub Ads, I also get into topics like content marketing, reader targeting, and everything else under the sun that pertains to building audience and reaching readers.

By signing up to my list, you get access to the all the old emails too, as well as sneak previews of upcoming books (meaning you get the jump on the latest tricks strategies of everyone else), and exclusive discounts too.

You also get a FREE copy of Following – a book that you can’t get anywhere else! I strongly recommend that you join over ten thousand authors and sign up today because there are all sorts of bonuses you will enjoy.

Download Following for Free


----------------









The Best Book Promotion Sites in 2026
Posted by David Gaughran March 12, 2026. Marketing • 229 Comments.

## The article starts below, but first: FREE STUFF!
These are the very best book promotion services in 2026 for boosting your sales, launches, free promotions, series deals, and mailing list sign-ups. Something for all budgets and experience levels with self-publishing – including a few options to promote your book which are completely free!
This list of book promo sites is curated by me personally. All sites below have been vetted and tested in a range of genres, and are here because of results.
You can skip to the section you are looking for below but make sure to check the end for a free course on how to build a marketing campaign. Yes, that’s right, a completely free course on how to promote a book. Read on, pilgrim!
- Promo Sites Explained
- Boost Sales With Promo Stacking
- BookBub
- Free Promotions
- Discounts
- Genre Specialists
- Series Promotions
- List Builders
- Follow Promos
- Money Savers
- Create A Marketing Campaign
Promo Sites Explained
Boost Sales With Promo Stacking
BookBub
Free Promotions
Discounts
Genre Specialists
Series Promotions
List Builders
Follow Promos
Money Savers
Create A Marketing Campaign

## Promo Sites Explained
There’s a whole section at the end on how to use what you might call promo sites, deal sites, ad sites, or readers sites, depending – you would think a community of writers might have nailed down the nomenclature around book promotions after ten years, but there you go.
Promo sites are basically like Groupon for ebooks: authors pay a fee to have their book listed in the daily offers – usually sent out by email – and they get lots of sales or downloads in return. Readers get freebies and discounts, and the author’s book jumps into the charts; everyone wins.
There’s a lot more to using these sites effectively in terms of strategy, and see the Build A Marketing Campaign section at the end for free resources to help you there, but those are the basics of book promotion for self-published authors. We focus a lot on price promotions – i.e. running discounts on books to get sales moving.

## Boost Sales With Promo Stacking
The very best way to use promo sites is to “stack” your promos, as experienced self-publishers say – which just means running several at once. However, don’t make the mistake of running them all on the same day.
The best way to stack promos is one after the other. Here’s a short video explaining the technique:

The Big Daddy of book promo sites deserves a category of its own as it is a different beast. A much larger beast.
BookBub arrived on the scene several years ago and utterly transformed book promotion. It now has way more juice than everything else here combined. Which is no surprise when you discover they have over ten million voracious readers subscribed to its lists.
Sign up as reader to the BookBub Featured Deals email and select your favorite genres from 42 categories. You will get daily emails with a range of books. Household names, undiscovered gems, traditionally published, small press, and self-published. A real mix of free books, 99¢ deals, and a few $1.99/$2.99 books – but even those are usually heavily discounted. Reader-me checks it daily.

### BookBub Featured Deals
Getting your book into BookBub’s Featured Deals email is expensive. You can check the full price list here. What you will see is that a 99¢ Featured Deal will cost anything from $152 to $1,000+ depending on category size. Your book will go out to 2m-4m readers in the case of the more expensive categories, and you could sell thousands of books. Authors typically report making their money back in twenty-four hours, and enjoying sustained sales for a period afterwards also. Also keep in mind there are much cheaper sites below, if that up-front cost is too high a barrier.
It’s a little cheaper to get a freebie featured, and more expensive for higher-priced books. (I don’t recommend doing the latter.) My last free run generated around 40,000 downloads – to give you an idea how powerful this option can be.
The biggest stumbling block with BookBub isn’t the cost. It’s the difficulty of getting picked. You must apply, and BookBub says it only accepts 20% of applicants. (I’m guessing Dan Brown has a slightly better chance than most, so you and me probably face tighter odds.) If you are exclusive to Amazon, or don’t have very many reviews on your book, or your presentation isn’t excellent, your chances of getting picked are very slim indeed. To apply, your first step is to sign up for BookBub Partners account – which I recommend doing anyway, and populating your books on the platform so readers can discover them.

### BookBub Ads
There is another way to reach this passionate audience of 10m readers – one which I’ve written a guide to called BookBub Ads Expert. A warning: the BookBub Ads platform is not for beginners; I recommend perusing the cheaper options below instead unless you are experienced.

## Free Book Promotions
Free book promotions refer to promoting a book which is free, rather than promotions which cost nothing (but those exist too – see below). These free promos are often the easiest and cheapest to put together, giving the best return in terms of simply getting your books into readers’ hands. Here are my favourite sites, in order of preference. In 2026 – as has been the case for several years now – free promotions generally get the best return.
- Freebooksy ($30-$120)
- Fussy Librarian ($15-$79)
- ENT ($45-$55)
- RobinReads ($60-$85)
- BookRaid ($0.15 a click, capped at a max charge of $60)
- EReaderIQ ($10-$30)
- BKNights ($5… +$5 more to be featured in the email, which is the good part) 
- BookBassett ($9)
Freebooksy
Fussy Librarian
ENT
RobinReads
BookRaid
EReaderIQ
BKNights
BookBassett
Note: Freebooksy and some others provide a “promo stacks” service where they will automatically book you into several different sites. I don’t recommend doing this. It’s far better to do it manually – see my video for a guide – not least because these stacks often include sub-par sites which I don’t recommend . The series promos on Freebooksy are great though and are discussed in detail below.

## Discounts
Some sites which are fab with freebies are not so good with discounted books so I have a different set of recommendations here. Most only accept 99¢ deals but that’s almost always the best way to run a discount anyway. These promos aren’t as powerful as they used to be – alas – but I still see great value in them when used strategically (see the video above ). Again, these are in rough order of preference.
- ENT ($45-$75)
- RobinReads ($60-$85)
- FussyLibrarian ($10-$22)
- BookRaid ($0.20 a click, capped at a max charge of $60)
- BargainBooksy ($20-$85)
- EreaderIQ ($5-$20)
ENT
RobinReads
Fussy
Librarian
BookRaid
BargainBooksy
EreaderIQ
Also check the genre-specific deal sites below for further options.

## Genre Specialists
These sites are recommended for both freebies and discounts, as long as your book is the right genre, of course.
- Red Feather Romance (Romance/Erotica – $95-$135 – series promos also available!)
- Book Barbarian (SF/F – $40-$60)
- Red Roses Romance (Romance/Erotica – $25-$45)
- Book Adrenaline (Thrillers/Mystery/Crime – $20-$35)
Red Feather Romance
Book Barbarian
Red Roses Romance
Book Adrenaline
Your genre isn’t listed? Hey, I feel you. But these sites are among the newer of those featured, so hopefully things will continue to develop in that manner. Some of the above are innovating in other useful ways, like allowing you to feature more than one book. Speaking of…

## Series Promotions
Some book promo sites are finally offering options to push several books at once – ideal for a series. As always, bolded items are stronger recommendations.
- Freebooksy ($65-$245) – the gold standard of series promotions. Results continue to be stellar from this fresh approach to series promotion which launched in beta in late 2021. Moves the needle in multiple genres: thrillers, romance, horror, SF/F, paranormal, YA, and non-fiction. Strongly recommended. More on how it works.
- Red Feather Romance ($185) – from the same people as Freebooksy (Written Word Media).
- EreaderIQ ($10-$25+… depending on your series length) – a regular free/discounted promo but they let you add mention of more books/formats for a nominal fee. Note: the other titles featured don’t strictly have to be in the same series.
- BookBasset ($22) – a featured author promo where they will also let you add up to four more books of yours (included in the price), as long as they are $2.99 or less; they strongly advise at least one book is free.
- BookDoggy ($21-$24) – this is also more of a regular free/discounted promo but where they let you add a mention of your series page. A cool add-on I wish was universal.
- BookAdrenaline/BookBarbarian/Red Roses Romance – this family of genre specialists (detailed in the above section) let’s you add a second book to a Standard Listing for a small additional fee. 
Freebooksy
More on how it works
Red Feather Romance
EreaderIQ
BookBasset
BookDoggy
Site owners: please add more series promotion options like the above!

## List Builders
A warning: list builders are best used to augment your organic list-building efforts, not to replace them. If your mailing list needs a quick injection of fresh blood, list builders can be very useful. Just remember to use this tactic sparingly.
This is not a replacement for getting subscribers organically, or a short-cut to getting a big and healthy mailing list.
If your mailing list is solely garnered from from list-builders and competitions and the like, then you might have an issue.
That said, they have their place, and I like using them strategically. This is an affiliate link, but BookSweeps is the best around – in my experience it drives much higher quality sign-ups, and the execution overall is generally much slicker, and you get to participate with much bigger authors too.
BookSweeps has recently brought in a new viral builder, which can bring thousands of emails, rather than hundreds. I’ve experimented with it and found it good value, but I’d recommend starting on the cheaper ones so that you learn the ropes. To get the best results, import the email addresses as soon as you receive them (when the promo ends), and onboard them carefully.
- BookSweeps ($50 for the regular promo, $250 for the new viral builder)
BookSweeps

## Money Savers
Times are tight! If you have a restricted budget, and can’t just jump on everything here, these are my top value, lower cost picks from everything available – including some freebies for you too.
Fussy Librarian – regularly runs discounts if you sign up to their author newsletter.
OHFB – a nice-looking site but I don’t think the $75/$100 promos are close to being worth the cost. However, this option is free (but there’s no guarantee of being picked).
Digital Book Today – I must try the $20 free book promo here again soon as it has been a while, but this promo is free.
And then out of the sites previously mentioned, Freebooksy is the best value for freebies if you can afford (go with ENT or Fussy Librarian if you can’t). Robin Reads and ENT vie for top spot for discounts, but BookBarbarian gives them a run for their money if you write SF/F.
The Freebooksy series promo is stellar, but it’s not that cheap. EreaderIQ has far less juice, but it’s a nice option if money is very tight, or a nice augment to Freebooksy if you have money to spread around.
Keep this in mind: I’m firmly of the opinion that it’s better to let your books slide for a while and organize a really good promotion every so often, than to be promoting all the time and using lesser value sites. Use that time for writing instead – publishing something new is always the greatest promo strategy!

## Create A Marketing Campaign
Booking a promotion above is a good first step when it comes to marketing, but if you want to build a real marketing campaign, if you want to come up with a killer launch plan for your next release, then you must check out my FREE course Starting From Zero.
Join 20,000 authors and learn everything about how to promote your books, from branding, packaging, and positioning, to building your list and platform, to handling a book launch or other type of promotion.
Best part? It won’t cost you a penny.

## Questions
Pop your questions on book promotions in the box below. I’ll get a ping right away, and answer you once I’m finished alphabetizing my collection of fine hams.

--------------------------

How To Self-Publish A Book In 10 Steps [2026]
Posted by David Gaughran March 12, 2026. Publishing, Resources • 533 Comments.

Do you want to learn exactly how to self-publish a book like a pro? I’ve been doing this for fifteen years now — is it 2026 already?!? — and I’ve created this comprehensive guide to help you through theten steps to successful self-publishing.
This guide covers everything from how to write a book that readers actually want, finding a professional editor, learning your niche and nailing your branding, how to format that manuscript of yours so it’s a perfectly reflowable ebook (some serious pitfalls here if you don’t know what you are doing), what price you should stick on that book of yours so that you can be enticing to readers but still make some scratch, and a few pointers on how to sell the blasted thing – as if you didn’t have enough to be getting on with! And that’s just for starters.
It’s a long, comprehensive post so use the menu below to click ahead, if needed. If you want my recommendation, grab a sandwich and read the whole thing. Hell, two sandwiches – it’s a monster – but there is a treat for you at the end. (It’s not another sandwich.) There’s even a place for you to ask questions at the bottom… if you have any left after digesting this beast!
- Write A Book Readers Want
- Find A Professional Editor
- Know Your Niche & Nail Your Branding
- Design Your Cover
- Lay Out Your Book To Capture Readers
- Format Your MS Into A Reflowable Ebook
- Decide Your Price
- Optimize Your Metadata
- Distribute Your Book
- Create A Marketing Plan & Get Reviews
- [FREE BONUS] Guide To Building Your Author Platform
- Your Questions On Self-Publishing
Write A Book Readers Want
Find A Professional Editor
Know Your Niche & Nail Your Branding
Design Your Cover
Lay Out Your Book To Capture Readers
Format Your MS Into A Reflowable Ebook
Decide Your Price
Optimize Your Metadata
Distribute Your Book
Create A Marketing Plan & Get Reviews
Guide To Building Your Author Platform
Your Questions On Self-Publishing

You can write whatever you like. This is one of the joys of self-publishing and being the captain of your authorship. However, if you wish to sell you must write a book which readers actually want to buy.
Here we run right into the first misconception authors can have about marketing. The aim of marketing – the non-sleazy variety – is to connect customers with products they already want to buy.
Marketing is not about creating a desire to purchase but tapping into one that is already there.

### Writing to Market
Of course, that also means that marketing isn’t about convincing someone to buy something they don’t truly want. Which is a problem if you have written for a niche audience but you’re selling it to a broader one.
If you want to self-publish a tragic love story about star-crossed space weasels, or a time-travel murder mystery starring a cybernetic centaur and his non-corporeal nemesis Mister Stinkcloud, you can totally do that (and I would totally read it).
If your tastes lean more towards latter Han Dynasty poetry or you have a forever-burning desire to tell the true story of Second Punic War – but in the style of a sea shanty, of course – you can totally self-publish that as well.
You are the CEO of You, Inc. after all. However, if you want a career as a professional author you must consider the market.

### Finding the Sweet Spot
This doesn’t mean you have to sell out, whatever that means. But you do have to seek the overlap between what you like to write and what actually sells.
Commercial considerations don’t end there – not if you are focused on building a career. If you are just a hobbyist, that’s perfectly fine and valid.
(And that’s not intended in any pejorative sense whatsoever. Both paths are valid. Just clearly delineating between writers seeking to build a full-time income and everyone else because the former requires a different toolkit.)

### Size Matters
The career-minded self-publisher should note that novels sell much better than short stories. (But here’s some specific advice for short story writers.) And it’s far easier to build a full-time income if you write a series versus only publishing standalones. At least, that’s true for most genres and niches.
Virtually every piece of self-publishing advice must be caveated. Writers and readers and books are so diverse that often anything goes. Some generalities are necessary when dispensing advice, though, or else everything will end up qualified to death. So, let’s proceed with this firmly in mind: there’s an exception to every rule and authors love breaking rules.
Key point here is this: your personal preferences are irrelevant in one sense; the market doesn’t care what you prefer.

### Going From Standalones to a Series
I started out self-publishing in several different genres. I focused more on short stories and standalones. As such, I can tell you the following with complete confidence.
It is much easier to make money if you focus on novel-length work in a commercially viable niche. A world or characters you can potentially spin out into a series too.
This advice really isn’t as limiting as it might sound; the market has swelled and balkanized to the point where that’s a rather generous runway for your story-plane and all sorts of sub-genres have become viable for self-publishers.
Maybe you’ll even surprise yourself! Personally, I found the process of considering the market and plotting out a potential series more enjoyable than predicted. And the increasing royalty checks from Amazon should make a rather comforting salve to any remaining discomfort.
Writing a book is an impressive feat. Getting all those words in the correct order is not as easy as Hollywood might suggest. And you should certainly congratulate yourself if you reach The End. You have genuinely achieved something special. And that puts you ahead of most people with literary inclinations. People who often never even start the book they have been talking about for years. Or rarely get beyond a few pages.
So, well done you. But now the real work starts.

On Writing by Stephen King is a stone cold classic. This was the book that gave me the kick in the pants needed to go from coffee shop poseur to actual writer. Part-memoir, part-craft advice, it’s as interesting as it is readable – whether you’re a fan of his fiction or not. Especially great for beginners.
Take Off Your Pants by Libbie Hawker is more for intermediate and experienced authors. It’s my favorite book on the thorny issue of plotting. It doesn’t matter if you are a resolute pantser (i.e. an author who doesn’t plot ahead). This wonderful book will teach you how to take readers on an emotionally satisfying journey. And as you will learn in this book, that’s the most fundamental aspect of storytelling.
Let’s Get Digital is by me, so, whatever. But it is a comprehensive guide to every step in the self-publishing process. And it has a bit more to say about writing to market than you get above – at least how I view it. Most importantly: it has a bunch more of my favorite writing resources if you liked these recommendations. Also, it’s free, so if you have a spare click or two in your pocket… it’s all yours. Can’t say cheaper than that.
Finally, I don’t want writers of shorter stories to be dissuaded by this hard-nosed advice. There are plenty of ways that shorter pieces can work for you, and this guide goes through all your options.

Your work must be professionally edited if you are going to ask readers to pay for it. This is your one big compulsory expense in the entire self-publishing process. Feel free to plow your own furrow with almost anything else but it’s important not to skimp on editing.
I also suggest not looking at it as a cost per se. It’s an investment in you and your book and your professional development as a writer. I still learn a lot every time I go through the editorial process, even with my experience; it’s always money well spent. Let’s hope I placed that semi-colon correctly because I get hoisted by my own Picard every time I write about editing.

### Hire a Pro
One of the biggest flubs a greenhorn self-publisher can make is to skip hiring a professional editor. Some try to do the editing themselves. Others get a journalist friend, or the teacher who lives next door, to edit their book. With all due respect to journalists and teachers (and DIYers), editing is a highly specialized skill set. Having a good grasp of grammar or a strong sense of style is insufficient.
Remember, there’s no bush league in publishing; your work will grace the shelves alongside the biggest books from the most famous authors in the world… and will be competing with those big names when trying to get reader attention.
Yes, editing can be expensive. But I’ll show you what type of editing you must outsource, and what you can handle in-house.

### The Editorial Process
This is really confusing for newbies because there are multiple types of editing. Multiple kinds of editors. Different labels are in use for each of these editorial stages as well. And then sometimes terms are used slightly differently in self-publishing versus traditional publishing – just to muddy the waters further.
Some examples:
- Content editing can be alternatively referred to as story editing or developmental editing. (Or dev edits, for fans of saving time.) 
- Structural editing could be viewed as part of content editing, or its own separate thing. 
- Sometimes line editing and copy editing are used interchangeably. These days, in the world of self-publishing at least, both are usually done together by a copy editor. But technically they are distinct types of editing and are handled separately by traditional publishers – certainly the bigger ones, who have a more drawn-out editorial process.
Reaching for the sherry yet? I don’t blame you.
Let me simplify this, with apologies to devotees of editorial nuance. Here’s how it breaks down for the typical self-publisher.

### Self-editing
This is exactly what it sounds like: an author editing their own book. It’s not a replacement for professional editing in any way *even when self-publishing). Let me be clear on that before someone smacks me upside the head with the Chicago Manual of Style (17th Edition).
Rather, self-editing is what an author must do before sending their manuscript to a professional editor. And if problems arise during the editorial process a manuscript might come back to you for further self-editing.

### Story Editing
It’s alternatively known as developmental editing or content editing, but whatever you call story editing, it focuses on the big picture. Story stuff.
Is your “high concept” actually quite dumb? Did everyone see your “surprising” twist coming a mile away? Is the central romantic relationship credible? Are your jokes missing the mark? Is your heroine acting in such an out-of-character way that your readers are going to hurl their Kindles en masse into a lake? That kind of thing.

### Beta Readers
At this point I should note that many self-publishers will use beta readers instead of hiring a developmental editor. A fully hands-on developmental edit is just so expensive. Which is because proper developmental editing is very time-consuming, not because such editors are some form of literary brigand.
Feedback from beta readers is usually incorporated at this point, in conjunction with doing multiple drafts and several self-editing passes. All this means the order of these first three steps can be highly fluid for people self-publishing. But they will all be completed before moving on to the next stage.

### Copy Editing
Reason you need all the above in order first is that copy editing doesn’t look at that story stuff. Instead it’s about your use of language and mechanics – spelling, grammar, punctuation, and so on.
Traditionally, line editing is separate and focuses on style (and is done before copy editing). However, copy editors serving the self-publishing market especially understand that these roles are often combined these days. Your copy editor should look at overall language usage. Things like repetition – and whether a sentence scans correctly or is overly clunky – as well as eliminating errors.

### Proofing
This is the final stage in the overall editorial process. After proofing, your manuscript will be locked down and the Ancient Ones will be invoked to watch over the ensuing debauchery.
You can handle proofing personally if you have an eye for errors – all that temping I did paid off! – but also remember that we can be particularly blind to mistakes in our own work.
Just make sure someone scans the text for typos, as they will surely be there, even with the best copy editor in the world. Authors can fiddle with a manuscript when it comes back from an editor, thus introducing fresh errors.

### My Personal Process
If you want to dive deeper into the world of editing, and listen to me yabber on about how my own editorial and self-publishing process plays out for both fiction and non-fiction, then read my comprehensive guide to The Five Stages of Editing.
Keep in mind that my process won’t necessarily be your process. You will discover what works best for your own self-publishing enterprise over time. Just ensure, at minimum, that you:
- self-edit your book until it’s as good as it possibly can be
- hire a professional copy editor, incorporate the necessary changes
- do your proofing until all typos and errors are eliminated.

### Suggested Resources for Editing:
My post on the five stages in a proper edit is as comprehensive as it sounds. This will also help you find your own professional editor.
And then if you want to specifically learn more about self-editing – what it consists of, why it’s not a replacement for professional editing, and how it still plays a role in self-publishing a professional book – then check out my article Self-Editing Explained.
Aside from my own horn-tooting, I strongly recommend the book Self-Editing for Fiction Writers by Renni Browne and Dave King (and I respectfully suggest that non-fiction authors will learn a lot from it as well).
Elements of Style by Strunk & White is also a classic for a reason and should be on every author’s reading list. Even if you stray from the old-school strictures of Strunk & White when developing your own voice, it behooves you to first learn the rules. Achieve clarity and precision before spreading those wings you are so eager to flap.

Time to put on your business hat; your nascent self-publishing empire shouldn’t ground to a halt while your book is being flayed by its editor. There are many things you could – and should – be doing in the meantime. Aside from writing the next book of course, which is always the most important task of all on your authorial To Do list.
However, most writers are creatively tired after a few hours in the word-mines, without necessarily being physically spent. Everyone is different with this, but I like doing my creative writing in the morning and any business, admin, research, or marketing tasks in the afternoon. Evenings, of course, are for exploring my fine collection of premium hams.

### Determine Your Specific Niche
Anyway, one such business task which you should devote yourself to immediately is getting to know your niche. This isn’t an academic exercise, or speculative research for some unspecified future use. It’s necessary for self-publishers to understand the readers they are selling to.
I should stress that your particular niche is different to your overall genre, more specific. You may write under the fantasy banner, but your specific sub-genre might be grimdark epic fantasy. In the big world of romance, your niche might be contemporary romance or historical romance. And under an overall genre umbrella like thrillers, you may specifically write serial killer thrillers.
Don’t panic if these labels are unfamiliar; you will pick them up pretty quickly and only really need to be know those in your genre.

### Research Your Sub-Category On Amazon
Some niches map neatly to specific sub-categories in the Kindle Store, where there are over 14,000 categories and sub-categories. You may already be aware of several such “shelves” which might be suitable for your book. If not, you must spend some time browsing around the Kindle Store on Amazon and identifying potential sub-categories. (International self-publishers: make sure to do this in the USA store – it’s the biggest market for almost any book.)
Online bookstores have distinct advantage over physical ones in that you can place your book on multiple “shelves” at once – which helps readers discover your work. But it’s important for many reasons that you only place your books where they are a good fit. (Not least because this will influence which readers Amazon recommends your work to!)

### What is Packaging?
It’s important that your book looks the part, has a similar style of cover to what already sells well in the genre, that the pricing is in line with the books it will be shelved beside, and that the blurb is written in the requisite style.
This is your book’s “packaging.” The first step to putting your book in a package that will be familiar and enticing to readers is to know what is already working in your genre.
The cover for a bestselling contemporary romance tends to look very different to the cover for a bestselling historical romance. When you survey your niche, you will notice commonalities in every aspect of the book’s packaging – right down to little details like the type of fonts used and the voice that the book description is written in.

### Find Commonalities In Your Niche
Familiarize yourself with your niche(s) on Amazon. Look through the Top 100 for your respective sub-categories. Make note of these commonalities, how these bestselling books are presented to readers. For bonus points, also take note of the authors who are selling well – particularly those who are aiming at the same readers.
Don’t be afraid to compare yourself to household names or mega-selling authors. This is a market research exercise, not public bragging which you might regret.
It’s not the time to be demure. If you are aiming at Nora Roberts’ readers, then note how her books are packaged.
Just don’t slavishly copy anyone. There is a big difference between recognizing that descriptions for bestselling urban fantasies tend to be written in first-person by a sassy heroine, and ripping off the branding of another author by using the exact same fonts and composition for your covers. The latter isn’t just unethical, it could also get you in legal trouble.

### Suggested Resources for Branding:
Self-publishing is getting better and better at branding and positioning. Some authors are naturals and instinctively know their niche and how to express that in a book’s packaging. Others can be good at learning what’s hot in their genre but struggle more with the execution. A few can get in a tizzy with every aspect… but panic not, everyone can learn this.
I have a free course called Starting From Zero which has an entire module on exactly how you can research your niche, and then implement it as well.
Just remember to pay special attention to your cover. In fact, let’s all do that right now.

You may get your cover designed at an earlier point in the process. Indeed, some organized self-publishers have the cover designed first. It doesn’t matter as long as you have it in good time.
Everyone judges a book by its cover, in case that wasn’t obvious.
Your cover is often handling the critical job of that first impression with a reader. A great cover won’t usually lead to success on its own but a bad cover will surely sink you.
This is your only other expense which is pretty much non-negotiable. Unlike editing, however, there are decent options for those on a budget.

### Cover Design Costs
The cost of a custom cover can be considerable – up to $500 is common, although the sky is the limit. However, it’s worth it. A great cover can do half the selling for you and will ensure that only the right readers click on your book. Whereas a poor cover will repel nearly everyone… which makes selling your book an impossible task.
Too many self-publishers skimp on editing or covers, and then waste money on marketing – which invariably fails because they didn’t invest enough in producing a professional product. A cheap or homemade cover is often a false economy. Replacing it can be an expensive lesson.
I understand the temptation to design your own cover but unless you are an experienced designer, I recommend hiring a pro.
Besides, if you can’t afford a custom cover right now, there are some excellent money-saving options.
Pre-made covers are professionally designed too, just not to your specifications. But those can be great quality too. There are many pre-made cover sites, and quality varies a lot. GoOnWrite.com is the best of the bunch. You can browse a huge selection of pre-mades, broken down by genre, from just $45.

### Suggested Resources for Covers:
I have a giant article covering every aspect of book cover design which you really must read. It doesn’t just show you how to hire a pro (for a reasonable price), it goes one further again and teaches you exactly how to brief your designer so that you get the perfect cover for your story. (This is the secret sauce btw.)
It also has guidance for those on limited budgets, and those intrepid types who ignore my warnings and design their own covers anyway. By the way, this post will also help you generate the blurb for your book, and if you want to find out why I pair those two things together, well, get thee yonder.

Your book is finished, edited, and covered, huzzah! But you have a few more preparatory tasks before you actually publish it.
For example, you will need to format the ebook file so it displays nicely on every device. But before you can commence formatting, you need to consider your book layout.
“Boring!” you might think, and you would be right. But the decisions you make here could have a big effect on those royalty checks. Which is the very opposite of boring, if you ask money-mad me.

### Optimal Book Layout
This is one area where savvy self-publishers are ahead of even the biggest publishers. And where you can get an edge on most of the competition – with just a little prep.
Experienced self-publishers know that the moment a reader finishes your book is the very best time to ask them for something. For example, to buy Book 2. Sign up to your mailing list. Review on Amazon. Maybe follow your Facebook Page, if that’s how you roll. This is something the large publishers tend to neglect, one way or another.
Those more traditionally minded publishers also tend to put in pages and pages of extraneous content at the start of an ebook – just because that’s what they have always done with print books. This kind of thinking permeates much of their approach to ebooks.

### Slim Down Your Front Matter
Experienced self-publishers know that many readers will sample an ebook book before downloading. You want them to taste the meat as quickly as possible. That’s what will truly sell your book. Not how deftly you thank your ex-wife or how sincerely you express your love for Pomeranians.
Those sections like “About the Author” – which might traditionally appear at the front of a paperback – are moved to the back of an ebook by smart self-publishers. They are accessible to readers with a button-press regardless.
I’m sure you see a lot of variation in the books you read, once you know what to look for, but this is when area where you really must take your cues from successful self-publishers. We tend to have very slimmed down front matter to help convert more browsers into buyers, and spend a lot of time thinking about what kind of end matter is most effective, because that’s an even bigger marketing opportunity.

### Make It Easy For Readers
Little details are important here. I remember switching from a polite request to review my book on Amazon, to one containing a clickable link to make things easier for them, and my review rate tripled overnight.
How you word phrase “upsell” will hugely influence how effective it is – this is where you dangle another book for reader to purchase, usually the next in the series. If you are shy or understated, then you won’t get readers excited and they won’t act on your suggestion right away – which is essential before your readers get distracted and move on to the next thing.
The time to capture that spark of interest is now.
If you are publishing your first book, then you won’t have anything else to sell readers but that doesn’t mean you should do nothing here. It’s absolutely critical that you use this opportunity to get readers to sign up to your mailing list – you should always be seeking to grow your mailing list, which is the most important marketing tool any author has. Asking (politely) for reviews is always smart.
Don’t waste this opportunity.

### Suggested Resources on Book Layout:
My free book Following will teach you how to set-up your basic reader-capturing apparatus: your website, your mailing list, and your Facebook Page. And it will also show you how to generate content which you can share in your newsletters and social media updates, so that you can grow your following and keep readers engaged until your next release.
Following is only available as a sign-up bonus when you join my mailing list, and – hey! – there’s your first lesson in email marketing too: offering readers an enticing bonus is a great way to boost your mailing list.
If you sign up to my free marketing newsletter, you’ll see how all that works in real time plus you will get useful marketing advice every Friday plus you will get a copy of Following as a welcome gift. A win-win if ever there were.
Still not convinced? Hmmm. Maybe read the reviews on Goodreads?

We’re barreling down the final stretch now so hold on to your helmets. Next we will turn that proofed manuscript into an ebook. This is a special kind of reflowable file that will magically resize and reshape itself for whatever device it is being read on… if you do it right.
If you get this wrong, you will see a massive spike in returns and a bunch of one-star reviews. So let’s avoid that.
The formatting options are so much better than when I started self-publishing ten years ago – which mostly involved crazy adventures into coding. (Reader: they weren’t so crazy.)
These days you have a number of satisfactory approaches, depending on your personal peccadilloes.

### Hire a Pro
You can hire a professional formatter very cheaply and a full-length book can cost you less than $100. This is the easiest option obviously, but not without its downsides.
If you are just outsourcing then you won’t have the ability to make any changes yourself. Some recommended formatting services like BBeBooks will fix a number of typos for you at no extra charge though.

### Use a Tool
There are a number of excellent formatting tools for self-publishers these days, many of which are free. And there even more terrible ones, so perhaps stick closely to my recommendations here. A bad tool can introduce errors to your book file, which you might only be aware of when the one-star reviews come rolling in.
If you are already using Scrivener, that does a reasonable job of turning out ebooks. Vellum is the #1 tool for creating ebook files, but is Mac-only, and not the cheapest anyway. Free options include the formatting tools at Reedsy and Draft2Digital.
Downsides of this approach are that it takes a little more of your time than outsourcing. Also, some of the tools (like Vellum) can turn out very similar looking ebooks – certainly I can always spot a Vellum book as a reader. (Although that’s not such a bad thing, to be honest – Vellum books usually look pretty neat.)
You might be a little more limited in how much you can customize your ebook, however.

### Code it Yourself
The downsides need to be flagged up front here; this option is not for the faint-hearted. You will need to be at least somewhat tech savvy, and have lots and lots of patience. But if you are willing to spend the time – i.e. to learn how to code your own ebook in a HTML formatter – then you will be able to format your own books in a jiffy, fix any errors whenever you like, customize the look if your ebook any which way, and also potentially develop a skill to help finance your self-publishing business as well.
Plenty of self-publishers have a side-gig as an editor or cover designer or formatter – especially at the start. If you don’t mind getting your hands dirty, check out my free guide to formatting your own ebooks.

### Suggest Resources on Ebook Formatting
BBeBooks is my go-to formatter. I do my own ebooks, but Paul Salvette does all my print books. He also formats the ebooks for many fellow authors who highly recommended him. And if you want even more formatting service recommendations, check out my free guide Let’s Get Digital – which has all sorts of recommended providers: editors, designers, formatters, and more.
Vellum is everyone’s preferred automated tool for formatting ebooks. Well, everyone that owns a Mac. Us plebs with PCs are out of luck. Some use Scrivener – which is a word processor but has a reasonable ebook export function. Others use free tools like the formatter from Draft2Digital.
But hey, want to code your own ebook and make sure it looks exactly how you want and is 100% error-free? You can totally do that. I do that! Here’s my guide to formatting your own ebooks. Warning: only for the technically minded. And the patient. On the plus side, you learn a new skill.

You have everything needed to begin uploading the various retailers, but I recommend a couple more bits of preparation first. Because you will be asked to make some important decisions during the process, which can throw you for a loop.
Pricing is one of the biggest, and one of the areas where newer authors can have the biggest misconceptions. Self-publishing and ebooks have turned pricing on its head. Nowhere is the gap between self-publishers and traditional publishers more stark than when it comes to book prices.
Self-publishing often views price as a lever, whereas traditional publishers use ebook pricing as a bulwark – aiming to slow the transition to digital and protect the print market. Self-publishers must realise that a huge amount of nonsense about pricing flows from the desire of traditional publishers to make ebooks less attractive to readers.
On the author level, the most common misconception is to confuse price and value, and to make the mistake of thinking that the price you attach to your book either reflects or influences that value. Whereas experienced self-publishers view pricing as a marketing tool.
Those who have published a few books know that the price on the book cover is not so important as the money the book is bringing in, and they will tend to choose the price that will make them the most money – it’s often that simple.

### Look to Your Genre
The other main consideration here is your genre. There can be a wide variance in price depending on the kind of book you write. Romance novels can be far cheaper than a business book, for example, so make sure you are within the normal range for your niche.
And make sure that you are pricing like self-publishers, rather than big traditional publishers. They aren’t seeking to maximize income from ebooks, like you are – they are often more concerned about protecting their print sales, as mentioned, and will artificially price ebooks higher as a result. Copy them and your sales will suffer.
Don’t price too low though. You need to leave room for yourself to run the occasional price promotion. Leading off with a bargain basement price won’t give you much wriggle room.
One last thing: when surveying your niche, be careful to parse out experienced authors who might be doing something aggressive like a 99c launch. They are deploying a specific strategy involving multiple books, which you can ignore for now.
If in doubt, a price of $2.99-$4.99 won’t see you far wrong, and will ensure you get the highest royalty rates on all retailers.

### Suggested Resources on Pricing:
I have a longer digression on ebook pricing you can read. I especially recommend perusing that if you are reticent to price cheaply or run promotions. Or if you have ever used the phrase, “I should get paid more for my book than people spend on a coffee.” (Sorry for picking on you like that, but this is important!)
If you’re skeptical, here’s a taste: “Price is not a hill to die on, but a powerful tool for levering your books into the charts, rewarding fans, generating buzz, and expanding your audience.” Well said, says I. (About me.)

Metadata can be a scary word to normies, but it just means little pieces of information that you attach to your book when self-publishing it. See? Not so freaky after all.
It’s basically just some fields you fill out when uploading – nothing to fear. And these bits of information are things you will be familiar with (one hopes!) like your name and your book’s title. Others you might be less familiar with include categories and keywords – and these are the really important bits of metadata you should particularly focus on.

### Collating Your Metadata
If you followed my recommendations above on knowing your niche, you will have made a head start on the category front. And if you read my monster post on cover design, you will be already lapping the ne’er do wells who skipped over it. But keywords might be a bit trickier for you.
I don’t know how far down the geekhole you want to go on this topic – I have a book called Amazon Decoded which gets pretty far down there in places, for those so inclined. However, I can also give you the quick-and-dirty version right here, because I’m good like that.

### Categories
You can only pick two categories when uploading – from a rather limited menu. But you can add a lot more later (up to ten ebook and print book categories, in fact), so be thorough in your research now.
Go through all those hilariously niche sub-categories on the Kindle Store which we mentioned earlier. And find as many suitable homes for your book as possible. Just keep it all relevant. Don’t throw your book in anywhere it looks out of place; that will hurt you long term.

### Keywords
Head over to Amazon.com and start a-searching. Type in things that you think readers might enter when searching for books like yours. Amazon will helpfully suggest common searches to you as you start typing. Draw up a list of potential keywords and then whittle it down to the seven most promising.
You can easily change this stuff after publishing so don’t sweat it too much. Non-fiction authors might want to spend a bit more time on their keywords; non-fiction readers use the search box more than their fiction friends.
Note that you need seven keyword strings. Each string can be made up of multiple words, with a cap of fifty characters on each. On Amazon anyway. Other retailers vary a little.

### Suggest Resources on Metadata:
I have a video over at my fancy new YouTube channel which breaks down categories for you. Come for the mustache, stay for the beard, as they say. (Note: they do not say this.)
As for the krazy world of keywords, the description of the above video will give you a bunch of resources to explore.
Finally, for the ubergeeks who want to get deep – so deep! – into the overall world of metadata, how the Kindle Store works, Amazon’s famous bookselling algorithms, and how you can use all that secret knowledge to sell lots of books, well, I got you covered.

Warning: this is nowhere near as straightforward as you might assume.
There are lots of places where you could sell your book but Amazon has a curveball with your penname on it. Welcome to one final area of self-publishing where it pays to be prepared before you press that big red button (it’s actually orange but whatever).

### Always Publish Direct to Amazon
Self-publishing on Amazon is a no-brainer. You should always publish direct to Amazon – i.e. without using a middleman – as it has the most readers, by far. It’s also the easiest marketplace to gain traction, in a happy act of serendipity.
If you want to dig into all the nuts and bolts of publishing on Amazon, check out my free self-publishing guide Let’s Get Digital. But the highlights are:
- no upfront fees
- a 70% royalty rate for most sales
- global reach
- payment 2-3 months after a sale is made
- publish print and audio editions
- access to an advertising platform.
Saying yes to all that is a very easy decision but then things get complicated.

### Amazon Exclusivity
When uploading to Kindle Direct Publishing (KDP) you get offered a few treats to entice you into make your book exclusive to Amazon; it’s not an easy choice.
In fact, enrolling in KDP Select – the name of the program which requires exclusivity – is still a matter of hot debate almost ten years since it was introduced. You may have seen authors debating whether to be “wide” or “exclusive” and this is what they’re referring to. (Now you know.)
Even experienced authors who know the business inside out can go back-and-forth on KDP Select and many will simply try it both ways and see which works best. That’s a viable approach, by the way, as you only commit to Amazon exclusivity for 90 days at a time and decide on a book-by-book basis.

### Pros and Cons of KDP Select
There are so many nuances to this decision that an entire chapter of my free self-publishing guide Let’s Get Digital is devoted to breaking down all the different scenarios. It is a very individual decision, so spend a bit of time weighing the pros and cons – they are quite clearly defined but you must decide for yourself.
In short, the two primary advantages of enrolling in KDP Select are access to a pair of tasty promotional tools which make it a bit easier to reach readers, and then entrance to the Kindle Unlimited program – which is Amazon’s Netflix for books, in case you have been so deep in the writing cave you haven’t heard of the biggest disruption to book publishing since the last time Amazon turned the business upside down.
Some authors love it, others despise it. I would say that it’s complicated but that would be lowballing things by a ridiculous degree. See Let’s Get Digital for a lot more on all that, if you’re curious.

### Going Wide: Outside the World of Amazon
If you resist Amazon’s siren call of exclusivity, there are at least four more retailers you will want to list with:
- Apple Books
- Barnes & Noble Press
- Kobo Writing Life
- Google Play
Note that Amazon has around three quarters of the market, and Apple is probably a good bit bigger than the rest combined. Yes, Google is a pipsqueak – at least in ebook terms. More stores than that exist, but they control miniscule slivers of the market.
You have the option of going direct with all those retailers. There are some advantages to doing so, including getting paid a little more. All these retailers have broadly similar terms to Amazon but check out Let’s Get Digital for the finer points.

Using a distributor is a sensible alternative if you wish to simplify your life. While going direct to Amazon is an imperative, using a distributor to reach the rest is a common choice.
There are a small number of reputable distributors and my strong recommendation is Draft2Digital. It will distribute your book to Apple, Barnes & Noble, Kobo, and a whole host of smaller retailers.
Draft2Digital also serves some subscription services like Scribd, and enables library sales as well. You can do all that with one upload, rather than having to deal with each store separately, which is quite the timesaver. All this will cost you about 10% of your royalties.
Smashwords is a legitimate alternative if you wish to explore other options.
Completists may wish to upload to Draft2Digital – even if they are already going direct with the other retailers. Library sales and Scribd can make this extra step worthwhile. Just note that you must go direct to Google Play regardless; they don’t work with distributors.

Kindle Direct Publishing will get your book on Amazon stores worldwide, and has lots of info on the platform. Apple Books For Authors is your port-of-call for Apple. Barnes & Noble Press is what will do the same for America’s largest bookstore chain. Kobo Writing Life will publishing you on Kobo, which is the biggest player in Canada and has grabbed a chunk of some interesting global markets. Finally, Google Play Books Partner Centre is the snappy name for the portal which will get you onto the smallest ebookstore on the biggest search engine in the world.
And then if you want to explore my recommended distributor, that’s Draft2Digital.
You can spend hours combing the help pages above to get all the information you will need on ebook formats and cover file sizes and royalty rates and payment terms – hey, it’s a free world! – but if you want a handy side-by-side comparison of everything, then Let’s Get Digital will see you right.
As for the slightly important step of actually publishing the darn thing, I have a video guide for you which walks you through the process step-by-step for KDP, explaining what to put in all those fields – so many fields! Yegads. The other retailers are all different, but similar enough that once you figure out Amazon you should be able to handle the rest yourself.

Barely has your celebratory prosecco been quaffed when you come to the awful realization that there is more work ahead of you yet. Even if you diligently followed all the other steps and truly did publish your book like a pro, you know have to sell the blighter. And doing that involves getting noticed in a pile of eight million others.
Come back! Come back! I have solutions. I just wanted to impress upon you the scale of the challenge so you don’t start slacking now that you are a Fancy Pants Published Author.
Selling books is totally doable, thousands and thousands of us do it every day, and we all started from zero. Keep that in mind when encountering the inevitable frustrations which lie ahead.

### Divesting Yourself of Marketing Myths
First step here is basically deprogramming yourself. Your head is, most likely, full of all sorts of gunk about how to sell books which is utterly, utterly false – or perhaps pertains to a world of print and traditionally published books, where self-publishers will normally sell almost everything online, and an overwhelming majority of sales will be ebooks.
Forget about:
- book signings
- pressing the flesh
- talk shows
- radio interviews
- media attention
- blogging
- tweeting incessantly about your book, or 
- hiring a PR whizzkid – even if you have money to burn.
“What’s left?” you might reasonably ask… in a slightly despairing manner. Well, plenty.
And none if it involves donning a pimp suit, harassing people into purchasing, spamming, engaging in any kind of deceptiveness, or even entering meatspace – should that be the kind of body horror you routinely recoil from even in normal times.
Good news, right?

### What Really Sells Books
What we actually do to sell books is a little more prosaic: we run price promotions and free promotions. We have newsletters for our readers and websites about our books. We spend a little bit of money on Groupon-style sites to highlight those deals. And… that’s it really, to begin with.
Later on, when you have more books and experience and royalty checks to spend, things will get more complicated – oh so complicated! – and you may get deep into any or all of branding, advertising, box sets, list swaps, group promotions, series deals, launch strategies, algorithms, and all sorts.
It’s a whole world, really, and you can choose your marketing poison when and how you like.
But those reassurances don’t make the prospect of marketing any less daunting to most authors. I was totally cheating myself. I have a marketing background and used to work for a tech giant – which is quite the twofer given the skills you need as a self-publisher these days. However, I understand how incomprehensible digital marketing can seem to many writers.

### Building A Marketing Campaign
Self-publishing is all about sharing knowledge and paying it forward – that’s how I got my start. To help everyone get to grips with book marketing, I have created a free course called Starting From Zero.
It’s pretty extensive and covers everything an author needs to know when building their audience and finding their first readers. And it really is free! There’s no catch, no bait-and-switch, and I’m not trying to sell you anything else either – even the two coursebooks are free as well.
Enroll here today and talk the course at your own pace. Let me give you fair warning though: just because it’s free, that doesn’t mean you won’t have to work. I’m pretty serious about that part. Self-publishing like a pro takes time and effort. Don’t expect shortcuts or gimmicks or magic tricks.
But I will give you a very effective method for selling books, and show you how to create your own marketingplan. A career plan, even.

### How To Get Reviews
If you are thinking that having a bunch of positive reviews on your book will help with the selling part, well, you would be right on the money. Here’s how to get them as a self-publisher, without spending a penny. I apologize in advance for Peak Lockdown Beard.

“And that’s not all,” he said with a ridiculous flourish. Some of the most critical marketing tasks actually take place before you self-publish your book. And I’m not talking about anything intangible (or questionable) like “building buzz.”
You might have heard the phrase author platform but I’m also guessing you didn’t hear it defined very precisely – or at all, I’m betting. I have a short, free book which will teach you what a real author platform is, why having one is so crucial to success in self-publishing, and – best of all – exactly how to build your own author platform.

Following also tells you what you can skip too – surely a relief after this firehose of information. It boils platform building down to the truly effective essentials: a website, a newsletter, and a Facebook Page. (And you can even ditch the latter if you are really squeezed for time.)
It goes through the mechanics of building all that step-by-step, and show you how to grow your platform in a sustainable way – a platform that actually sells books.
Sign up here to get your free copy of Following. And see you in the charts, compadre.

## Your Questions On Self-Publishing
Unfortunately, I get far too many emails these days to respond to everyone – it would be the full time job of several someones – but I do want to help as many people as possible.
If you have any questions, pop them into the comment box below and I’ll reply when I can.

--------------------------

15 Rules For Advertising Books
Posted by David Gaughran 12 March 2026. Marketing • 12 Comments.

## The article starts below, but first: FREE STUFF!
I started working in digital advertising over twenty years ago and while it is tricky to generalize about three very different ad platforms – Facebook, Amazon, and BookBub Ads – there are some general rules that I recommend everyone considers, before losing their shirts on book advertising.
Not least because books present a pretty unique marketing challenge when compare to generic products. Something which can surprise marketers who move into publishing.
Make sure to check the end of this post for some free book advertising help. I’ve got lots of resources for you to help with Amazon Ads, Facebook Ads, and BookBub Ads. Whether you are a beginner or more experienced, you will find something useful!

## Rule #1: Don’t spend what you can’t afford
I mean it: don’t spend what you can’t afford. Experienced advertisers may look at this a little differently. But when you are starting out with ads, the old gambler’s rule should apply, i.e. only spend what you can afford to lose.
Certainly don’t borrow money for an ad campaign. That’s putting incredible pressure on yourself and multiplies the chances of a terrible outcome. Consider rolling your book profits back into marketing instead. It’s a nice, organic, and sustainable way to grow your business. And whether you have a lot to spend, or a little… start small.
Only increase your budgets when you are sure the ads are working. Ad by that I mean selling books, rather than generating traffic or hoovering up Likes; not all Likers blossom into lovers, alas.
When you are more experienced – i.e. when you have tried-and-tested targeting and you already know that your ad assets convert – you can start campaigns off much hotter from the get-go. But you can’t shortcut that process when starting out without taking huge and unnecessary risks.

## Rule #2: do explore the wider world of marketing first
It’s really wise to explore other paths to readers before deciding advertising is the most suitable. Advertising sounds sexy… when it’s really tiresome number crunching for the most part. Or epic frustration as you spend hours wrestling with technical issues. And/or a boring slog learning how the systems work.
Book advertising is also a massive time-sink as well as a real money-pit. A whole legion of course sellers and tool floggers might claim that advertising is the cure for all your ills. But remember that it’s only one part of the big world of marketing. Other approaches may work better for you, especially when you’re starting out or your budget is restricted.
I especially recommend that beginners (and anyone on a budget) pay attention to the world of deal sites. It’s often the cheapest clicks you’ll get anywhere and no specialist knowledge is required.

## Rule #3: don’t blindly take advice from anyone
This is a good approach generally and especially important in the world of advertising. Everyone’s ad knowledge is built on constantly shifting sands and is heavily skewed by their own personal experiences. Question everything and everyone, and don’t blindly take advice from any source.
I’ve been working in online advertising on and off for enearly twenty years now and I’m still frequently wrong, or just stumped, or catch myself acting under any number of cognitive biases. And I might not realize until after the fact.
For all the talk in advertising of data and spreadsheets and testing, it’s a deeply pseudoscientific world. Data is cherry picked. Theory becomes best practice and then dogma, without being subjected to nearly enough scrutiny.
Most advertisers are chasing results above all, rather than scientific rigor, so that’s understandable. Just keep in mind that things are never as “objective” or as “proven” as they seem, even when everyone is experienced and has the best intentions. And that’s before we get to all the bluffers and schemers that advertising attracts.

## Rule #4: do survey the field before making your choice
Definitely do take a look at each of the three major ad platforms before deciding where to spend all your book advertising dollars: Amazon, BookBub, and Facebook. Play with each of them a little. Dip your toe into some resources and get a feel for what works where. Look at the strengths and weaknesses of each platform – because they are wildly different in so many ways.
Go deeper again, if you want my advice, and check your comp authors on each platform are viable targets. Because one of your key authors might not be targetable at all on Facebook but might have a healthy following on BookBub. Or they might have no followers on BookBub. Or might be too expensive to target on Amazon.
Time invested researching these things is often money saved on bad ads.

## Rule #5: don’t ask this question
Please, I beg you, don’t ask “which ad platform is hot right now?” They’re all hot if you know what you’re doing and they’re all not if you don’t.

## Rule #6: do focus your dollars on one platform
All of the ad platforms are challenging enough to master… when you focus on them. Trying to make headway with all of them at once is going to melt your brain. While the fundamentals of digital advertising can often stay the same, how that plays out in terms of best practices on each platform can be utterly different.
Learn each platform individually, and in turn, and approach each platform as a distinct problem to be solved. Besides, mastering one platform is often more than sufficient. Getting a handle on two is just gravy. (I’m not sure I know anyone who is excellent at all three, by the way.)
Finally, stick to the three platforms of Amazon, BookBub, and Facebook. There’s always who’s sure they’re about to crack Twitter or Pinterest or Google. I’ve been hearing that for years and I’m still waiting…

## Rule #7: don’t sweat it if you struggle
You really shouldn’t get too disheartened if you can’t crack one particular platform. Move on to another, it might be more your speed. I was able to master BookBub Ads relatively quickly. Facebook took me a lot longer despite having far more resources at my fingertips. And I’ve never been able to fully crack Amazon Ads – despite being on fairly intimate terms with the Amazon algorithms for some time now.
You don’t always know what will work in advance; you might need to play the field a little before finding your perfect match.

## Rule #8: do be careful of generic tips
I strongly recommend that you seek out specific best practices for book advertising rather then simply applying generic advice. As someone with a general marketing background, I can tell you that books are… weird.
We are selling super cheap products with tight margins where the customers are uber-picky and have the most bizarrely niche tastes and we are competing in a marketplace with maybe 1m suppliers and over 8m products. Yikes.
(It’s quite the marketing challenge btw, so don’t feel bad if you are struggling with it.)
Anyway, my point is that general advertising advice can sometimes lead you astray. I personally love some outside resources, but I also have the experience to parse what will and what won’t work for books. (Jon Loomer for Facebook ads is great, for example.) If you do venture beyond the Pale, keep this caution in mind – certainly with Facebook Ads, and to a lesser extent with Amazon Ads.

## Rule #9: don’t listen to obvious nonsense from shovel sellers
It’s really important not to listen to obvious BS from people with something to sell. I hear people saying things like “Amazon is just pay-to-play now” or “Facebook has completely throttled organic reach.”
Neither of those things are true, as a simple glance at your inbox or newsfeed should show you, which will be filled with Amazon recommendation emails and organic Facebook updates respectively. I can get still get excellent organic reach with my Facebook Page. It’s harder than it was – it takes work to keep the content focused and engaging – but it is doable. And Amazon makes millions of organic book recommendations every single day by email and in various locations all over its site, which drive millions of book purchases.
Ignore anyone saying otherwise – such things usually originate with (surprise!) someone selling a course or tool which “solves” the “problem.”

## Rule #10: do befriend the algos
It’s important to figure out how organic visibility works on Facebook and Amazon. Organic visibility is not only a potential alternative to advertising, it’s also something that will massively augment the ROI you get from your advertising efforts.
If you know what makes content enticing and share-worthy on Facebook, you can bake that into your ads as well. And if you know what triggers Amazon’s recommendation engine, you can bake that into your marketing campaigns too.

## Rule #11: don’t rush
The people who really need to hear this probably skipped over the headline so let me repeat it. Don’t be in rush. Set your expectations appropriately. Save up a budget for learning the platform. Learn the fundamentals. Understand how the system works. And take your time on these critical steps before rolling your ads out.
Spend significant time ensuring that the product is in good shape (that’s your book). Ensure your ad assets are in fine fettle (your ad text and image, where appropriate). And be as certain as you can be that you are pointing these things at the right people and that the ensemble you have put together in terms of the product and its packaging and your ad assets are all screaming “This is the kind of book you love” to all those readers you’re aiming at.

## Rule #12: do spend a lot of time on your landing page
Make sure to focus a lot of attention on optimizing your landing page. Whether you advertise on Amazon, BookBub, or Facebook you will, most likely, be pointing your ads direct to your listings on Amazon (or elsewhere). Conversion is the most critical variable in advertising and probably the most under-discussed.
The experience that readers have when arriving on your book’s page will close the sale or drive them away. Everything must be in harmony, working towards that goal: your cover, price, title, blurb, sample.
Authors invariably waste dozens of hours in the advertising weeds when the real problem was on their book’s page. If the traffic you are sending to your book’s page is good quality – i.e. the right readers – then the problem is invariably with your landing page.
While we are on the topic of conversion, Amazon is better at closing the sale than any other retailer. It has crunched a gajillion data points and iterated its sales pages endlessly. Which means you should probably start off just pointing ads to Amazon before trying to solve the harder problem of selling at other retailers (or direct sales).
Ignore that advice if you wish – as with any advice that doesn’t work for you. But perhaps keep it in mind if you struggle to get ads to convert outside the Bezosverse. Perhaps there are more fundamental issues you need to solve before attempting more difficult advertising challenges. (Same goes for advertising full price books over deals, btw).

## Rule #13: don’t forget about genre variances
Not all best practices are universal across every single book niche, and that’s especially true when it comes to advertising your books. Yet another good reason to test everything at a lower level before making bigger bets.

## Rule #14: do remember that common problems have solutions
Most common problems have well-established solutions – at least in a meta sense. For example, if your ads aren’t getting enough impressions, it’s usually an issue with bids (or maybe budget). If your ads are getting impressions but no clicks, it’s usually a problem with your ads themselves (targeting, image, or text). And if you are getting clicks but no sales, then it’s usually a problem with your landing page.
These are all just rules of thumb, but they have endured since I started in online advertising in 2004 – holding up remarkably well across different platforms too. It might not be right 100% of the time, but it’s true often enough to be useful.
Book advertising is now different in this respect and approaching things with this general framework should – at the very least – save you precious time when trying to diagnose issues with our ads.

## Rule #15: don’t let it happen in Vegas
It’s really important not to succumb to gambler’s fallacy – a fallacy so powerful that it’s hard to avoid even when you are acutely aware of it.
Whole cities have risen from the desert because of this, bankrolled by our desperation to dig ourselves out of a hole, by digging in the same spot which dug the hole in the first place. Another $100 isn’t going to flip an ad from bad to good. Please note this fallacy is easier to avoid if you follow Rule #1.

## Want More Help With Book Advertising?
My newsletter subscribers enjoy an entire trove of free Facebook Ads resources guiding them through every aspect of the platform – including all the lastest changes.
This is just one of the perks that my mailing list subscribers receive – all for free. We also get into topics like building a killer email list and everything else under the sun that pertains to building audience and reaching readers.
Sign up to my list, you get access to all the best emails you missed, as well as sneak previews of upcoming books (meaning you get the jump on the latest tricks strategies of everyone else), and exclusive discounts too.
You also get a FREE copy of Following – a book that you can’t get anywhere else! I strongly recommend that you join twenty thousand authors and sign up today.

--------------------------

These Amazon Category Hacks Will Boost Your Book Sales
Posted by David Gaughran 9 May 2021. Amazon, Publishing • 40 Comments.

Choosing the right Amazon categories for your book is such an important factor in your success. Being smart here can greatly increase your visibility, making your work more likely to be discovered, purchased, and recommended.
But if you make bad decisions here – or opt to do nothing at all – you can limit your book’s success. Sometimes you can even nudge Amazon towards recommend your book to all the wrong people! Which invariably fails, of course, and causes Amazon to think you have written a dud. Meaning Amazon is less likely to recommend your book at all. This is something you really want to avoid.
You should revisit your book’s categories on a regular basis. Not just to ensure you are maximizing visibility, but to check Amazon hasn’t placed you in a bad category. You need to know exactly which categories and sub-categories your book is in. (Amazon doesn’t make that part easy.) And then keep on top of changes to the category system as well.
The advice in this comprehensive guide draws from a book I wrote called Amazon Decoded. This book is the culmination of years of research. It breaks down exactly how the Kindle Store works, how you can design marketing plans which seduce the algorithms instead of fighting them, and the exact ways you need to tweak your metadata to get the biggest halo from every promotion you run.
I’m going to tap into that research today to explain exactly how you can get Amazon’s category system working for your book, instead of against it.
Here, you will learn why the Kindle Store is broken down into so many categories (and the massive opportunity this presents). How you only get access to a limited menu in KDP. The ways you can expand the number of categories for your book to 10 specific sub-categories – and more! Why it’s important to only place your book in relevant categories. And how you can remove your book from bad categories (and why that is important).
Yegads, that’s a lot – we might need a Table of Contents! Use this if you wish to skip ahead, but I strongly recommend reading the sections on relevance and bad categories. You might have the power now to add all sorts of categories to your books. However, use this power wisely or it could really backfire. I mean it! Read on for more on that and everything else…
- The Power of Visibility on Amazon
- Limited Category Menu When Publishing
- How To Add Up To 10 Categories To Your Book
- Adding Even More Categories For Print & International
- How To Check What Categories Your Book Is In
- Avoiding Bad Categories
- The Importance of Relevance
- Researching Your Ideal Categories
- Your Action Plan: Category Optimization Checklist
The Power of Visibility on Amazon
Limited Category Menu When Publishing
How To Add Up To 10 Categories To Your Book
Adding Even More Categories For Print & International
How To Check What Categories Your Book Is In

## The article starts below, but first: FREE STUFF!
Avoiding Bad Categories
The Importance of Relevance
Researching Your Ideal Categories
Category Optimization Checklist

## The Power of Visibility on Amazon
Amazon sells a staggering array of products – around 350m at the last estimate. A beefy taxonomy is needed to classify everything. Shoppers need assistance finding what they are looking for. And Amazon’s data-hungry algorithms need assistance classifying everything appropriately. Primarily so it knows exactly what to recommend to each individual customer.
You can read a full breakdown of how Amazon recommendations work if you like. But what is most immediately relevant is the sheer size of the book category system… and the enormous value you can wring from it.

### The Kindle Category System
There are over 8 million books in the Kindle Store. But it’s not just the number of books being published which has swelled; Amazon has been watching reader tastes become increasingly niche since the Kindle Store opened in 2007.
To make it much easier for these increasingly picky readers to find the specific type of books they prefer, Amazon now has 14,000 categories and sub-categories – just for books! Some of these are incredibly broad categories like Fantasy. Others are much more niche like Paranormal Romance featuring Demons & Devils.
Amazon calls these “Browse Categories,” and that name gives a hint at their value to authors – because readers really do browse these categories looking for books fresh to read.
While the Top 100 of the Kindle Store is probably out of reach for most authors, it’s important to note that each of these 14,000+ sub-categories has its own Top 100 Best Seller list – for both free and paid books – which gives authors a considerable opportunity for visibility. An appropriately sized pool for every book to play in, if you like.
Not only that, but many of the recommendations that Amazon makes to readers are category-based. You will not be eligible for them unless you are in that exact sub-category.
If authors are smart about their metadata, do their research, and add more relevant sub-categories to their books – and I’ll show you exactly how to that in a moment – they can exponentially increase their visibility on Amazon.
By adding more categories you instantly become eligible for a whole new swathe of bestseller lists and Amazon recommendation emails. This increased visibility will also add a a considerable halo every single time you have a sales spike, making every launch more profitable and every backlist promotion your run more lucrative.

### Bootstrap Your Way To The Top
This is your prize: more sales, money, and visibility. As well as greatly increased likelihood that readers will organically discover your work and also that Amazon will recommend your work to readers as well.
This isn’t just an extra dollop of cream for the cats at the top table either. Because each category has its own Best Seller lists and associated customer recommendations, Amazon’s category system helps books bootstrap themselves to success, giving each book and author a smaller pool to shine in before tackling the bigger fish elsewhere.
But you will only benefit from Amazon’s category system if you make the right choices. Some of these niche Best Seller lists might not receive anything like the traffic of the bigger categories. But the competition is often much less fierce, allowing smaller books and authors to gain momentum… if they take the trouble to research appropriate categories.
It takes a little bit of time, and a touch of fiddling, but it’s all in the set-up. Once you have optimized your book’s categories, you don’t have to mess with it again – aside from checking in every year or two, perhaps, to see if anything should be tweaked.

### There’s Just One Problem
When you first self-publish on Amazon, you are given a choice of just two categories from a very limited menu. This is often missing the specific sub-categories where you wish to place your book.
You may have noticed your book appearing in some of these sub-categories, even though you didn’t explicitly choose them. Perhaps you also appeared in some sub-categories you would rather you didn’t.
How do you get into all the categories you truly want? Which categories are good for your books and which should be avoided? What can you do to remove your book from inappropriate categories? And where can you find out which categories your books are in right now? (And why does Amazon make this so bloody convoluted!?!?)
Let’s break it all down.

Amazon’s category system might seem higgledy piggledy. But this is more a product of something being gradually added to over a long period of time, rather than designed by a drunk person.
The publishing interface on Amazon gives us little idea of the full power of the category system. We can only choose two categories when uploading our books. Not only that, it’s a very restricted list of categories – often containing rather broad choices like “Historical Fiction.” For some reason, Amazon doesn’t always let you drill down to the exact sub-category you want. For example, “Medieval Historical Fiction” is a category in the Kindle Store, but is not selectable when publishing your book.

It’s not exactly clear why Amazon makes it so complicated. This list appears to be a legacy system as it is based on industry standard (BISAC) codes. Indeed, you may have noticed that this limited menu bears much more relation to the category choices on other retailers than it does to the actual category breakdown in the Kindle Store. Well, this is why.
We can grouse about such quirks but it’s important to recognize they present a big, fat opportunity as well. Most publishers and authors will pick two broad-ish categories from that list… and then leave it at that.
Whereas savvy self-publishers know there is a way to add many more very specific sub-categories that aren’t immediately selectable. Hello, secret menu items! And also ways to avoid bad categories, boost your paperbacks, and then tailor all that for different international markets as well.

The method for adding additional categories used to be quite confusing – and it was never quite clear precisely how many categories you were allowed. Amazon has now streamlined all this considerably and the situation is much more straightforward.
You are permitted to place your book in up to 10 categories and sub-categories. To get the exact categories you want, you simply need to contact Amazon using the process below. It’s that simple.
All that messing around with keywords to get into certain categories is no longer necessary. (That system looks like it is being phased out by Amazon anyway.) However, that old keyword-category system can still cause authors issues, so we’ll return to look at it in a moment.

### Step-by-Step Method of Adding Categories
For now, here’s the new, up-to-date process for adding categories to your books – fully Amazon-approved!
- Identify the full category path for each of your preferred sub-categories. By this I mean actually write out Kindle eBooks > Mysteries, Thriller & Suspense > Thrillers > Political for each of your target categories, rather than just Political Thrillers – you will need this in a moment. (And if you need help researching the ideal target categories for your book, I have you covered below.)
- Log in to your KDP account. Click the Help link in the top right, then the Contact Us button in the bottom left of that page (they don’t make it so easy to find). This is the direct link, if you are having trouble.
- Underneath “How Can We Help?” select the first option “Amazon product page” and then “Update Amazon Categories” right underneath.
- An email template will appear. Add in the ASIN for your book, and then the full category path for each category you want added. There’s some research tips at the end if you are stuck.
- Ignore the section on removing categories… unless you have bad categories that you wish your book to be removed from – more on this too in a moment.
- Click “Send message” and Amazon should sort this out for you in a couple of days. Note: depending on where you are in the world and what time of day it is, you may have the option of doing this by phone – it doesn’t matter which way you do it. Phone tends to be faster, but don’t expect the changes to be instant. They might still take a day or two to process fully.
This is the direct link

### With Great Power Comes Great Responsibility
Just remember the most important thing: always keep it relevant. I’m serious about this. Don’t brush it off!
You don’t have to use all ten categories if you can’t find many appropriate ones. You need to be sure that your book is a natural fit for the categories you pick. A murder doesn’t make something a mystery and some light banging doesn’t make it a romance.
In fact, as you will learn in a moment, putting your book into categories where it doesn’t naturally fit might look like a quick-and-dirty way to pilfer some extra visibility (or to pluck a low-hanging Best Seller tag), but this can hurt you.
And it might attract Amazon’s attention – the bad kind of attention.
I hope I have attached enough warning signs to this idea, but let me say it one last time. You have the power to put your book into ten categories, but that doesn’t necessarily mean you should use it.
Now let’s look at how you can further expand visibility for your print books, and internationally, so we can mix some sunshine in with this pesky parade-rain.

## Adding Categories For Print & International
The situation regarding print editions has been clarified too. Amazon says you are permitted up to 10 Kindle categories and 10 Book categories for each book – the latter being the category system which houses print editions and audiobooks as well.
This is where you can really gain an edge. While authors are starting to get to grips with the new category allowances for ebooks, most haven’t yet realized they can do the same with their paperbacks too – or that they can run through this process internationally also.
That’s right! You can – and should – repeat this process for each international market which is important to you.
In case you didn’t notice, the Kindle Store is broken down quite differently in each international market. I guarantee you that even if you have ten excellently chosen sub-categories for your work on Amazon USA, not all of those will be replicated in your UK, Canadian, or Australian editions, let alone non-English markets. So take the time to peruse the Kindle Store breakdown in territories which are important to you.
It’s completely up to you how many markets you want to repeat this process for. Just note that the benefits probably approach zero in the smaller, non-English-language markets. You should consider doing it for your primary print editions and your UK ebooks at the very least. However, those with foreign language editions should pay attention to the local language market for those books.

## How To Check What Categories You Are In
“But wait,” you might have said multiple times during this article. “How can I find out what categories I am in?”
It’s a fair question, ever since Amazon stopped appending that information to every book page, much to the chagrin of metadata mavens and snoopers everywhere.
Officially, Amazon says that the only way you can find out which categories you are in is by emailing them and asking. However, there are unofficial ways – better ways.

If you already have Publisher Rocket (affiliate link), then you can use that to see what categories you are in. You can also check out any other book that catches your eye, for that matter. Or the level of competition in each category, how many sales you might need to hit the charts, and so on. The main feature of Publisher Rocket surrounds keywords. I’ve found it very helpful in identifying good keywords for my books, and just for generally understanding how readers use Search on Amazon. (I was genuinely surprised by the terms they use – it’s far different from Google.) It costs $97, but there is a 60-day moneyback guarantee if you don’t find it useful.
However, if you want a free option, then I strongly recommend bklnk.com. I use it all the time and recommend it. You can get results for any Kindle book or print books, and for the USA, UK, and Canada as well. Super handy.

You can end up in “bad” categories in two ways: either by accident or by choice. Let’s deal with the accidental cases first before whipping out our wagging finger.
The old system for getting into various sub-categories involved choosing certain keyword triggers (authors often called these “keyword categories”) from a list doled out by KDP. There were three major problems with this system. First, the list was inaccurate and incomplete and authors often had to guess at the keyword trigger. Second, this system used up valuable keyword space unnecessarily. Third, it often resulted in authors placing their books into inappropriate categories – completely by accident.
The keyword triggers Amazon selected were pretty common and generic terms. Meaning authors routinely ended up in categories where they had no intention appearing.
Furthermore, this keyword-category system didn’t just place books in the wrong categories – which is bad for the respective authors, but also the readers looking through that category searching for a new book – it also provided cover for those abusing the system.

### Gaming The System
Some authors and publishers deliberately place their books in inappropriate categories in an attempt to game the system. It’s a lot easier to get to #1 in Fairy Tales than it is in Contemporary Romance. Those with more flexible morals have been putting their books into smaller categories with that in mind, regardless of how relevant that category was for their books, what a mess that made of the category for readers, or how hard they were making it for genuine authors of those types of books.
The situation is so out of hand right now that many authors think that an Amazon crackdown is coming. It’s not just the seedy end of self-publishing that’s to blame either. Established UK publishers are some of the worst abusers of metadata, in a nice change of pace.

### Amazon Crackdown Coming?
Amazon has been slowly amending the terms and guidelines and help pages over the last while. You might have lso noticed some references to metadata infringements in the new Quality Dashboard. It currently only tracks things like typos and broken links. But you will see explicit references to metadata there as well. It appears that Amazon is slowly building out all the infrastructure needed to start policing things like mis-categorization of books.
So, ethics aside – always my favorite caveat – those who are miscategorizing their books to eke out some short-term advantage might want to start considering the long-term consequences. Amazon can be slow to click into gear with this stuff, but when it does, it can be ruthless.
But there’s one more reason why you should be careful where you place your books. The entire Amazon recommendation engine is built on relevance.

Some people will dump their books into any category going to gain advantage. They don’t care how much they mess up a category. Or what effect this has on genuine readers of that category (or authors trying to serve those readers).
But here’s the thing: they are only hurting themselves long-term. Even if you don’t care about the ethics around this, and I really wish you would, you are only grabbing some questionable short-term gains at the cost of some serious long-term pain.
Here’s why.
Amazon’s entire recommendation engine is built around relevance. Amazon doesn’t want to spam people with crappy recommendations. It knows the value of user trust in its recommendations and works very hard to personalize the Amazon site for each user experiencing it. Basically the equivalent of a bookstore rearranging itself so that your favorite books are always on the front table. That’s the aim, at least, and Amazon is the best in the business.

I could write an entire book about this – and indeed I have: it’s called Amazon Decoded – but the short version is this. If you put your book in an inappropriate category all your are doing is feeding Amazon bad data. Do that, and will recommend your book to the wrong people.
Of course, if Amazon recommends your book to the wrong people, the conversion rate on those recommendations will be poor. Then it will be reticent to recommend your book further.
Even if you aren’t swayed by that, keep in mind the following. Amazon is probably going to start policing this stuff. There are all sorts of references now on the Help pages which hint at this now. The terms and conditions and in the Kindle Publishing Guidelines too. All sorts of references to the miscategorization of books and other metadata fouls like that. In other words, all signs point towards an impending crackdown.
All of which makes it exceedingly important that you know which are your ideal categories. Ones which will truly work for your book.

It’s important to identify a list of target categories and there is only one way to do this: by taking your time to go through the Kindle Store and look at how it is broken down for your genre(s). Take note of any category or sub-category where your book would fit.
Some authors might struggle to identify more than a handful, whereas others will be overflowing with choices. Some genres have more granular sub-categories than others. And then non-fiction often has more places where a book could potentially be shelved without looking out of place. Author experiences will vary at this stage.
For those overflowing with choices: make a list of the must-haves and the maybes. Try to estimate how competitive each category is (i.e. look at the Sales Rank necessary to hit the Best Seller list). If you are really struggling to choose between several categories, perhaps consider having a mix of smaller categories where you could potentially chart now, and larger ones where you will benefit from extra visibility when you have a sales spike.
And for those authors struggling to find more than a handful of categories, keep looking! There are over 14,000 categories and you might find some useful ones if you search around. Amazon regularly expands the category system too; it’s good to check in on this periodically to see if new candidates have emerged.

To be clear, there is no list of categories anywhere that you can consult. A handful of websites purport to do that, but they are pulling from the limited menu available when publishing in KDP, rather than the actual category breakdown in the Kindle Store. Besides, all you need to do is head to the Kindle Store and nose around.
Looking for a list of categories is like trying to reinvent the wheel… while sitting outside a wheel factory that is handing out free wheels. (Don’t forget to repeat this process for print, and any international markets which are important to you.)
But hey, if you want to watch over my shoulder as I go through the Kindle Store and explain how you can find suitable categories, I got ya:

This is fun because your action plan is to basically go through everything you just read in reverse!
1. Research your ideal categories.
2. Make a list of the must-haves and the maybes.
3. Check which categories your books are in right now.
4. Identify any bad categories you wish to remove.
5. Email KDP with your list of category changes.
6. Repeat the process for each book, and for any print editions or international stores you need.
And once your categories are updated, all you need to do is run a promotion and reap the benefits. And the most cost effective way to do that is with my curated and up-to-date list of book promotion sites.

You can do all this in one email to KDP if you wish (you can even do all your books, all your print editions, all your international stores in one email – or even one call). Personally, I think the chance of errors is high if you go that route. I usually send one email per book to keep things straight – on both sides!
That’s it, I hope you learned a lot about Amazon categories today and how they can help you sell more books. I have a whole book like this breaking down the secrets of Amazon and showing you how to switch-up your marketing to seduce Amazon’s algorithms into recommending your book.
It’s called Amazon Decoded and I think you can pick it up pretty much everywhere for $4.99 or thereabouts.
Feel free to leave any questions in the comments and I’ll respond if I ever stop eating for ten seconds.

--------------------------

How To Design A Book Cover That Sells
Posted by David Gaughran 8 January 2023. Publishing, Resources • 77 Comments.

## The article starts below, but first: FREE STUFF!
Book cover design is the arguably most important stage in self-publishing a book. Certainly the step with the most impact on marketing anyway. Handle this process with care if you want to give yourself any chance of success.
Without the right cover, no one will give your book a chance. No matter how well-written it is, or how diligent your editor.
We are going to break down the anatomy of a great book cover. You will know what you’re shooting for, but that’s just the beginning.
This comprehensive guide to book cover design will also show you how to research your specific niche. You will learn what readers are already responding to, where to find your very own cover designer and what they might charge, and also how to write a design brief so the cover you get is exactly right for your niche — the secret sauce that many beginners miss.
You will also get options if you are on a budget, and specific guidance if you are one of those libertines who insist on designing their own book cover, no matter how many warning signs are erected along that path.
- The Anatomy of a Great Book Cover
- Book Cover Design Costs
- Custom Cover (Hiring a Pro)
- Premade Covers – For Limited Budgets
- Designing Your Own Book Cover
- How To Brief A Cover Designer
- Bonus Extras: Paperbacks & Promo Graphics
- Book Cover Design Checklist
The Anatomy of a Great Book Cover
Book Cover Design Costs
Custom Cover (Hiring a Pro)
Premade Covers – For Limited Budgets
Designing Your Own Book Cover
How To Brief A Cover Designer
Bonus Extras: Paperbacks & Promo Graphics
Book Cover Design Checklist

## The Anatomy of a Great Book Cover
The most misleading cliché in publishing is that you should never judge a book by its cover. Because almost every single reader does exactly that.
A great cover can sell a book all on its own. A bad one will sink the most wonderfully written story imaginable.
So far, so obvious.
Here’s where things get tricky. A good cover which doesn’t quite fit your particular book can cause serious problems – ones which are difficult to unwind.
Book covers must be nailed on for their respective niche or they will attract all the wrong readers — something that will hold back the success of your book. No matter what marketing magic you conjure forth.
Whether you want to spend on a custom cover, save money with a pre-made cover, or attempt designing your own, it is imperative that you know the respective conventions in your genre; stray from those at your peril.

### What does great book cover design look like?
The first mistake authors make is to answer in an artistic sense, rather than a commercial one. Your book’s cover is not an expression of your soul as an artist. It’s a marketing tool – one which should be explicitly designed to get readers to click on it.
And not just any readers, but the right readers.
Remember that most readers will first encounter your cover as a small thumbnail in a retailer’s search results. Or as a small image among many in the charts, or as one of dozens of items clamoring for attention on an Amazon product page. Not in glorious, full-size, attention-grabbing hi-res. And certainly not as a giant image which graces the oversized computer monitors that designers tend to favor.
This means that your book cover design should be simple rather than ornate. And it should be striking instead of subtle. As Seth Godin once said, designing an effective ebook cover is like designing a desktop icon – as opposed to than the wraparound hardback of your authorial fantasies.
Also, the idea isn’t to convey every single story element. But you must clearly communicate what kind of book it is. Adding even more difficulty to that tightrope walk is the need to do this in a granular fashion.

### Niche Down
This means that your cover shouldn’t just hint at romance, thriller, or fantasy. It should go deeper again and scream paranormal romance, cozy mystery, women’s fiction, epic fantasy, historical adventure, legal thriller, and so on.
These are all distinct niches with their own cover conventions, which must be respected if you wish to sell books. If that’s not a concern, do whatever the hell you like.
I can imagine lots of authors chafing at this advice. This isn’t evidence of publishers or designers lacking imagination, but simple recognition that you have milliseconds to grab a reader’s attention in the fast-moving stream of the internet.
You should use that time wisely and flash up a giant neon sign. “This is the kind of book you love!”
Great book cover design is a bat-signal to its target reader.
Even within sub-genres, there are variances across different niches. For example, a historical romance set in the glens of Scotland might have a burly chap in a kilt wielding a large sword. But a regency romance is more likely to have a silk-gloved lady in an epic ballgown.
You need to know these differences. Or hire a professional.
Even if you do hire a professional, which I strongly recommend, it’s still important to research your niche, to know what is selling, and to brief your designer accordingly – and I’ll show you how to do exactly that in a moment. And if you are designing your own cover, you need to know that stuff inside out.

## Book Cover Design Costs
There are just two steps in the self-publishing process where I think it’s really important to spend money. Finding an editor is one, and designing your cover is the other. Just don’t panic when you see some of the prices quoted below — I will give options for those on more restricted budgets.
However, let me also add that you should consider this an investment in your book just as much as it is an expense, should funds allow; you can’t magic money from thin air, alas.
Let me give you some ballpark figures before exploring each option in detail:
- $300-$500 – the starting price of a good custom cover.
- $30-$40 – is the surprisingly low floor for a pre-made cover.
- $0 – DIY costs nothing, naturally, but you might still be paying for software and stock photos, and other stuff like that.
Now let’s look at the pros and cons of each of those options in detail.

## Custom Cover (i.e. Hiring A Pro)
Hiring an experienced, professional designer to create a custom cover for your book is easily the best option for all authors… if they can afford it.
Rates vary quite a lot — and the sky really is the limit with the world’s most in-demand designers. However, despite what some unscrupulous and ill-informed types would have you believe, you can get a good custom cover designed for $300-$500.
It will be more again if the design involves buying exclusive rights to a custom piece of art, rather than the more standard stock photo manipulation, but that’s a pretty high-end approach that most beginners can ignore.
Those with real money to burn can go to town here by commissioning an illustration or organizing their own photo shoots, but this is the realm of bona fide bestsellers and we shan’t linger and press our noses against the glass. We’ll dispense with FOMO by telling ourselves that such things can be more hassle than they are worth.
Seriously though, you really can get a very good cover in that price band of $300-$500. But to ensure it is 100% dialed in for your niche as well as being competent or pretty, you need to brief your designer correctly – which we’ll get to momentarily.
For my specific recommendation on professional book cover designers who do wonderful custom covers in that price band, grab your free self-publishing guide – which is available from your preferred retailer. And if you work your way through this article, I’ll throw you a marrow-filled bone at the end as well.

“What if I don’t have $300-$500?” you might reasonably ask. Well, you do have options – other than ennui, I mean.
Most authors in this position make one of two mistakes: they either jump right to designing their own book cover, often with terrible results, or they ask a friend who has some design experience… but not book experience.
Before those on a budget turn the air blue, there is a much better idea. One that almost everybody can afford.

## Premade Covers
A premade cover can be just as enticing and professional as a custom one, but only costs a fraction of the price – sometimes as little as $30 or $40.
What sorcery is this? Let’s take a look.
Pre-made covers are also professionally designed but are basically spare covers that designers have knocking around. But those can be great quality too. When you get a custom cover, the designer will often offer you a few different mock-ups of your cover, and then only finalize the one you choose. The leftover covers you didn’t select are often then sold as pre-mades at a vastly reduced price.
There are many pre-made cover sites, and quality varies a lot. GoOnWrite.com is consistently the best of the bunch with a huge selection of pre-mades broken down by genre for just $40.
Only downside with pre-mades, aside from being restricted to the selection on offer, is that you can only usually change the author name and title, and that’s it.
No fiddling! You take what you’re given. Of course, you might also have to spend quite a bit of time scouring pre-made cover collections before finding something suitable.
But once you do, the cover is sold just once, to you, and no one else can purchase it.
Just keep in mind that if it is using a stock photo, you may see that photo elsewhere, even in a similar context. The cover design is exclusively yours though – and that’s what you are acquiring.
For something truly unique that costs nothing at all, you can design your own cover. But does that mean you should?

## Designing Your Own Book Cover
Hoo-boy. Here’s where you can really get yourself in trouble.
A truly unfortunate mistake that newer self-publishers can sometimes make is not hiring an editor and/or a cover designer, as those tend to be the two biggest expenses… and then spending that money on marketing instead.
Or wasting that money on marketing, I should say. Because you can’t sell a book with a bad cover – no matter what promotional fireworks you drum up.
It’s worth repeating: you are better off scouring pre-made cover sites for something suitable rather than designing your own cover, unless you are an experienced designer. If design is something you merely dabble in, I’d recommend holding off and cutting your teeth on things like promo graphics first – more on those below.
However, I know some resolutely independent authors will disregard such advice, no matter how forcefully I express it, so let me give you some pointers and point you towards my favorite tools.
I still think you should be very cautious – even if you have design experience, there are so many specific quirks to book cover design, and ebook cover design in particular, that even good designers from other fields can slip up on their first go.

### Focus On The Ebook
Here’s one common pitfall: designers without specific ebook experience can sometimes optimize their design for the print edition, and not realize the ebook edition should take primacy, particularly for self-publishers.
If that sounds strange to you, keep in mind that a typical self-publisher will regularly see 80%-90% of their sales in ebook formats. And where this isn’t true, that’s normally because they haven’t really gotten sales going generally.
Even in the few exceptions where a self-publisher has strong and consistent print sales, readers will still tend to discover their work online, meaning they will usually view that cover first as a small thumbnail among many others.
So, the same rules apply. Keep it simple and striking and communicate that genre quickly and cleanly – and the specific niche within the genre too.

### Pour Love Into Your Lettering
What else? Spend a lot of time on the typography. Good lettering can truly elevate a mediocre cover, and amateur lettering can ruin the most lovely photo or illustration. Some designers do master’s degrees in typography – there’s that much to it, and it’s that important.
Spend a lot of time getting the title and author name right or you will undermine the rest of your design. And when it comes to plastering your name on the front, don’t be shy. Some authors think you have to “earn” a larger font size. This is a holdover from traditional publishing you can – and should – ignore.
Try to make your title and author name legible in thumbnail and make sure your fonts work well together. While a stylized font for your title can work, I generally think a less stylized one for the author name almost always works best, regardless of what you choose for the title.
The same rule applies to lettering as it does to your overall composition and cover generally: look at what’s dominating the charts, and make sure you fit in. Don’t slavishly copy anyone, but don’t look out of place either. The books in the charts are what readers are already responding to, after all. Take time with this research step – I’ll break it down in detail below – and that will really help you nail down some rather important details.
Knowing the differences between niches which I spoke about above assumes even more importance if you design your own covers or promo graphics.
Finally, for any kind of design work you might fancy handling yourself, check out my post on my favorite tools for wrangling promo graphics, which also work well as free book cover design tools.

I recommend following this process whether you are hiring a professional designer for a custom cover, or designing your own – even if you are simply purchasing a pre-made cover.
Going through this process of drawing up a design brief will help you so much when it comes to marketing your book, and will also assist you in generating some crucial assets like your marketing tagline and your blurb – things you don’t want to be scrambling to produce under pressure.
Take the time to do this right, and you will reap the rewards.
The process here somewhat mimics the internal process in a large publisher when an editor is commissioning a cover, with some adaptions made to suit the world of ebooks and self-publishing.
Now, some designers might not want all this information from you, and that’s fine. Many are strictly visual – of course they are – but the process is very useful for both sides anyway. Besides, your designer can (and will) just disregard any extra detail they don’t need.
I recommend saving a document on your computer with all this information, because you will be referring back to it yourself when actually uploading your book to the various retailers, and when creating your marketing campaigns – trust me.
Some of it might sound a little silly… but go with me on this.
Write the following headings into a document, and then try and fill them out according to my directions. Don’t worry if some of this takes time – it really should, if you are doing it properly. And then when you are discussing your cover with your designer, you can just give them the document and they will cherry pick what is useful to them.

### Author Name and Title
This is not as obvious as it seems. Presumably you know your own name, but have you checked if it is already in use? You definitely want to do that before paying $300-$500 to slap it on a book cover, because you may need to add an initial, or use something else altogether.
Glomming off a more famous name – intentionally or otherwise – will only end in tears.
While this isn’t the place for a lengthy digression on what makes a good book title, let me just note that you need to have this 100% nailed down before commissioning your cover. Again, you might want to check if your title is in use. While titles can’t be copyrighted, they can be trademarked. It is common for titles to be re-used (says the author of a book called Mercenary), but I’d recommend staying away from re-using a title in the same niche, especially from a recent release.
Here’s something less obvious: is this book a series? Have you picked a series name? That’s something you should do before publishing, and before commissioning your cover.
Keep in mind that different niches have trends and styles when it comes to titles as well. Literary books can be wordier – and I’m sure you’re so surprised to hear that your eyebrows shot right off your face and out the window – and thrillers, to give one example, can often be just one word. Survey your genre, note the commonalities. Non-fiction types especially will need to come up with a sub-title as well – note that Amazon can ding you for using a sub-title which doesn’t appear on your cover.
One final point for those writing a series: one way to ensure strong branding across a series is with the title. If Agatha Christie was self-publishing today, she might have followed up Murder on the Orient Express with Murder on the Eurostar and then Murder on the 10:26 To Chepstow.
Best not to box yourself in with the choice for Book 1. Do a little brainstorming on potential titles for future books as well.

### Your tagline
You don’t strictly need a tagline, but trust me when I say that you will find endless uses for one. I personally find the process of generating one quite painful – I don’t have that natural talent for taglines that some authors possess – but it’s always worth it.
When someone asks me what my novel Mercenary is about, for example, I can tell them that it’s the story of “USA’s most famous soldier of fortune, a hard-drinking drifter who changed the face of a nation.” I can then use that tagline on my cover, in my description, in my Facebook Ads, in the sales copy at the back of my books when talking about the other things I’ve written, and so on.
The tagline might come to you first, or it might organically spring forth from the process of writing your description.
Don’t make that face! You actually do need to write your description at this point, and the reason why it’s essential in the cover design process is that those pesky paperbacks require a book description for the back cover.
A lesson most authors learn the hard way when the designer asks them what to put in that space. And then they scramble. And when you scramble, you make mistakes… says the guy who had a goddamn typo on the back cover of one of his books for quite some time.
Yeah. Don’t do that.

### Book description
Here’s where you really do need to take the time to look at what’s going on in your genre. But before you even do that, I recommend looking at the book descriptions on Amazon for five of your favorite books. Even better: try and write the descriptions yourself first and then read the descriptions online.
Unless you are preternaturally talented on this front, you should notice the real descriptions are probably leaner and meaner and focusing on the core conflicts of the story.
You should also notice that styles vary a lot depending on the genre. One more reason why you should have good knowledge of what’s happening in yours.
I’m not going to sugarcoat this; I find writing descriptions to be a bore. Worse than that, painful. Something about the process triggers some primeval sense of foreboding, as if I’ll suddenly realize that I have put all my book’s words in the wrong order.
What can I say, I have an overactive-imagination. Just don’t worry if you feel the same way too – it’s normal enough.
Hewing to a formula can help. Most novels are about a hero who wants something and has to overcome some kind of obstacle to get it, and you just need to put some flesh on that story skeleton in an efficient manner. Practice really does make perfect here. That and wine.
Calling in some reinforcements can help. I sometimes trade blurb-writing duties with a friend. She has the emotional distance from my story to boil it down to its core essentials, and I have with hers.
If you need more hands-on help with writing your book description, I recommend staying away from paid services – I can think of at least one which is heavily marketed to authors but the blurbs are really not great.
Read Book Blurbs Unleashed by Robert J. Ryan instead, who is an experienced professional copywriter and knows his stuff.

### Target audience
You should at least have some idea who you are writing for. You will get better at defining this as you get more experience and it’s perfectly fine to be vague. Maybe you know enough to say “my target audience is grizzled vets who love action-filled science fiction and tend enjoy themes of brotherhood, honor, and duty.” But it’s also okay to just know your target audience likes small-town sweet romance.

### Comp authors
Here you need to be a bit more detailed, and definitely don’t be shy. If you are aiming to pinch readers off E.L. James or Dan Brown, then say so – it’s not public anyway. Knowing who your “comp authors” are is pretty important, and something else that you will return to again and again over your career.
Newer authors can be reticent to say that their comp authors are the likes of Brandon Sanderson or Kristin Hannah.
This isn’t about who you write like or who you think you might outsell one day, for that matter. It’s about the readership you are aiming for.
So if you do write fast-paced, multi-faceted epic fantasy or thoughtful character-driven historical fiction, Brandon Sanderson or Kristin Hannah could well be perfect comp authors for you.
This guide to comp authors should give you some more to work with, should you need it.

### Book covers you love… and hate
Confession: most designers could ignore almost everything you have generated up to this point, and that’s totally fine – I trust it was a useful exercise for you anyway. And it will help you with this part, which really is important to all designers.
You need to give them a list of book covers that you love. It helps if they are also from the genre you are working in, but if you want to include one or two from outside that which have certain features you like, feel free.
I don’t need to explain why designers might find this useful, but want to add that it’s just as illustrative to include some covers you hate – especially if they represent things trending in your niche that you want to avoid, for whatever reason. For example, when redesigning my non-fiction, I was quite insistent that my designer avoid white covers, because (a) I felt they were overdone in my niche and (b) I think they get swallowed up by the white backgrounds which predominate at the retailers.

That’s all the information you need for your design brief. Just send all the above to your designer and let them come back to you with any specific questions. Usually they will mock up a few covers and see which you respond to best, and then finish that one off for you, incorporating any changes you need.
For those scouring pre-made collections instead, this process should help you zoom in on the more suitable covers. And for the intrepid types designing their own… I really hope you spend more time on this part of the process than anyone else.
All of you should quickly run through the final section on print editions and promo graphics, because, if you’re smart, you can get your designer to throw in some very handy extras. And the cheapest and easiest time to do that is when you are commissioning your cover.

For a small surcharge most designers will happily include a paperback version of your ebook cover – and if you have followed the steps above, you will be ready to roll on that front too, which gives you the possibility of launching the paperback simultaneously, or at least soon afterwards.
I sell a decent amount of print, but there’s always a huge difference based on how long I take to get that paperback version out – which makes sense. Launch week is when your most passionate fans will be purchasing, and when you will have more attention on your new release.
But don’t worry if you are not ready to actually release the paperback quite yet – designers will usually let you cash in that chit later, when you have all your bits and bobs lined up.
And there’s more.
The time when you’re ordering your book cover is also when you’ll get the best deal on other extras, like promo graphics. For a small additional fee, most designers will be happy to generate graphics for your website, newsletters, or Facebook Page – as well as ads for Facebook and BookBub as well, if you plan on doing those.

- 1200×628 if you want the “letterbox” shape for Facebook posts and ads.
- 1080×1080 for Instagram, and also for that square shape on Facebook.
- 640×200 is a good size for newsletter banners.
- 820×360 will work for your Facebook Cover Photo – i.e. the header on your Facebook Page.
- Various is the only size guide I can give for your website because everyone’s needs there will be different. About as useful as a chocolate fireguard, but there you go.
For those who want to try and create promo graphics themselves – which is an exceedingly useful skill, and one I recommend you develop – I have a variety of video tutorials on my YouTube channel, which will give you a step-by-step on-screen process that you can follow, one that will work for almost any book.
I have a bunch of these on my channel but here’s the latest one covering ad graphics for both Facebook Ads and BookBub Ads.
For either platform, and for your graphical needs in general, I strongly recommend asking your designer to give you the file for your book cover with the lettering removed.
This “blank” cover will enable you to use the cover art for all sorts of promotional graphics, not just ads. Designers should provide that free, so there’s no reason not to get it.

## Book Cover Design Checklist
That was a lot of info and it’s all important, but let me summarize what you need to do in a handy checklist.
- Understand what makes great book cover design – ebooks especially.
- Know your niche – spend time on this or I will personally scold you.
- Decide between a custom cover, a pre-made, or DIY.
- Compile your design brief and don’t skip any of the recommended steps!
- Communicate all this to your designer if you are going the custom route.
- Commission your extras or DIY – you will need them either way.
And that’s it!
Please feel free to ask your questions in the comments. I do want to help you all get the very best covers you can for your books. It’s such an important step that far too many get wrong.
I promised a recommendation at the end for a good cover designer. If you want one I recommend who works in a few genres and is competitively priced, try Deranged Doctor Designs. They will do your ebook and paperback and audiobook for just $420 (as of January 2023).
Feel free to recommend your cover designer in the comments. But please note the genre so the recommendation is more useful for everyone.
Feel free to link to their site… but no self-promotion, please.

--------------------------

9 Ways To Unleash The Power of Free
Posted by David Gaughran 12 March 2026. Marketing • 15 Comments.

## The article starts below, but first: FREE STUFF!
Authors are giving away more stuff than ever before: permafree books, reader magnets, and ARCs are just the tip of the iceberg. What’s going on? Should you jump on the free train? Does any of this stuff generate money? Let’s break it down.
The self-publishing landscape today looks very different from when I started fifteen years ago, that heady time when ebooks first exploded in popularity.
But readers today respond just as well to free offers and discounts. Many people have less disposable income right now – or worry about having less tomorrow. Freebies also look particularly enticing when you have a new device to fill with books.
Here are nine ways to unleash the power of free, so that you can tap into this surge of new readers, build your audience, and make more money too. Yes, all these freehunters can be more than happy to pay for things… if you hook them.
- Free Promotions
- Permafree
- Reader Magnet
- ARCs
- Re-engagement Cookie
- Content Upgrades
- Advanced Previews
- Public Beta
- Audio Magnet
Free Promotions
Permafree
Reader Magnet
ARCs
Re-engagement Cookie
Content Upgrades
Advanced Previews
Public Beta
Audio Magnet

## Free Promotions
The easiest and most obvious way to tap into the power of free is to run a free promo. Although it’s not quite as straightforward as it looks.
On non-Amazon retailers, you simply set the price to zero, or schedule your price of $0.00 for the date you wish the promotion to start. However, Amazon doesn’t let you set books free directly. You must wait for it to go free one one of the other retailers, and then ask KDP to price match.
The exception to that is if you are enrolled in KDP Select and exclusive to Amazon. Then you can do this easily and automatically via a Kindle Free Promotion, but there are a bunch of restrictions.
If you are a wide author, the main logic behind a free promotion is to drive sales to your other books. If you are exclusive to Amazon, you get that benefit, plus the gravy of Kindle Unlimited page reads – which can spike after a free promotion, if you rack up enough downloads.
In either case, it’s strongly recommended that you advertise your free deal to have any impact. There are a range of effective and affordable book promo sites where you can pimp your freebie.
My list is recommend book promotion sites is heavily curated and right up to date, and has all sorts of options depending on your budget.
One quick tip: start planning about thirty days out so you have the full suite of recommended sites to choose from.

## Permafree
New authors can sometimes be wary at the thought of doing a free promotion. And aghast at the suggestion that they might give a book away for free permanently.
However, it’s one of the easiest and cheapest ways of getting eyes on your work in a crowded marketplace. And it’s especially powerful at hooking readers on a character whose adventures play out over multiple books.
A permanently free – or “permafree” – series opener is an established and effective ebook pricing strategy. One that is particularly popular with wide authors.
Of course, this strategy won’t pay out unless you actually have more books to sell. But if you have written a series or you are planning one – which you really should, if you want to make money – then making the first book permafree is something you could consider.
Authors don’t usually make Book 1 free from the get-go, in case that thought gives you hives. Often they will launch at full price. Then as more books come out in the series, they drop the price of Book 1. Some authors swear by a 99¢ series opener, whereas others will rave about free.
No need to sweat this decision. You can experiment.
Important note: if you are too fixated on individual price points (e.g. “my book is worth more than a coffee”) then you could be missing out on the huge boost in overall income that a cheap series opener can deliver.
Experimenting, and being flexible, is the key to a savvy ebook pricing strategy. And in 2021 when free offers are hotter than ever, having a permafree book can dramatically expand your audience. Which can dramatically boost your income as readers devour your entire series.
If you are worried about self-publishers or cheap books destroying the publishing industry, then read this superb post from Ed Robertson on how our supposed bargain basement pricing is perfectly in line with historical paperback prices. Which led to a huge expansion in reading, of course.

## Reader Magnet
A reader magnet is a free bonus which encourages readers to sign up to your newsletter. Usually it’s a free story or book, but it can be anything really. Some authors have gotten extremely creative here. Readers love them too — find them magnetic, even.
But to really attract readers in great numbers, consider that the most powerful magnets share two key characteristics. They are enticing, and they are exclusive.

### How to make a reader magnet enticing
First the enticing part: a short story will do, a novella will more than suffice, but a full book is the most attractive to readers — all other things being equal, of course. But the actual length of the reader magnet doesn’t matter as much as tying it closely to your main series, the world you write in, or one of your popular characters.
Remember that a magnet has a twin role: attracting new-to-you readers and encouraging existing ones to sign-up.
If you tie the magnet closely to the universe of your books it will handle both jobs pretty well. Existing readers will always want to spend more time in the worlds you have lovingly created. (Or non-fiction readers will always want more key insights and practical takeaways on your area of expertise.) And then new-to-you readers who like your magnet will be very interested in more adventures featuring the same characters or settings.
Some authors go further again and make two reader magnets – one for existing readers and one for totally fresh ones. It can be a particularly effective strategy if you have lots of shorter pieces laying around that you don’t know what to do with. And a very savvy one if you are using Facebook ads to aggressively grow your mailing list.

### Why your reader magnet should be exclusive
And now the exclusive part: make signing up to your list the only place readers can get this story. Even for money! Don’t sell it on Amazon, or anywhere else for that matter.
Enticing… and exclusive. Put those two together, and you have one powerful reader magnet.
Make sure to have an optimized sign-up page on your website dangling your magnet. Then advertise this in the front and the back of your books, and your social channels.
There are more resources on email at the end of this post. But in case you are wondering, I use MailerLite to manage my newsletter (affiliate link). And I use BookFunnel to distribute my reader magnet.
If you want to see how all that works in practice, feel free to sign up to my marketing newsletter. You will see my sign-up page, my welcome sequence, how I dole out my magnet. Plus you’ll get free marketing advice every Friday if you decide to stick around. (No hard feelings if you don’t.)

## ARCs
Advanced Review Copies or ARCs is the name for the practice of distributing free copies of your upcoming release to a select group of readers — usually to garner reviews but sometimes to generate buzz.
It’s a long-standing practice in the print-focused world of traditional publishing. And something that has really come into its own in the more digital world of self-publishing, thanks to it’s low cost and effectiveness in generating reviews especially.
Authors sometimes worry that giving out ARCs will cannibalize launch sales among their most passionate readers (and most likely buyers). But they should zoom back a little. Reviews are worth more than sales, especially during launch week when your book has no reviews but extra visibility. Besides, you only need to give out a handful of ARCs really.
Here’s the kicker: often the recipients of ARCs are the kind of loyal fans who buy the book anyway to support you — they want more books by you, remember? — and also champion your work to further readers as well.
I don’t particularly worry about book piracy myself. But if that is a concern of yours, you can gift books securely via BookFunnel – which is just one of the awesome add-on features you will get as part of your subscription.

## Re-engagement Cookie
Ugh: jargon! Okay, so a cookie is just the nickname for any freebie doled out to a mailing list subscriber — terminology which will be familiar to anyone who has read Newsletter Ninja. Reader magnets are a type of cookie, for example.
A re-engagement cookie is a freebie whose aim is to turn a reader’s head when they are eyeing the exit. Feel free to explore Newsletter Ninja if you want to get into the mechanics. In short though, you need to segment out readers who are terminally disengaged – i.e. not opening or clicking anything in your newsletters for ages. Ask them if they want to stay or go, and dangle the cookie as a reward.
They get a free story, you get a more engaged list — a leaner one too, after you have trimmed those who have no interest in being there. And really, if someone doesn’t want a freebie from you, they are highly unlikely to ever buy anything in the future.
There’s little point keeping them — they only drag down the performance of your list, and can ultimately affect your overall deliverability, meaning the people who actually want your newsletters can stop receiving them.
Relationships take work. Not every reader-story has a happy ending, but sometimes you can spice things up with a well-timed cookie.
Short stories can be perfect for the this job, especially if you have some gathering cyberdust on your hard drive.
BTW, if you have several such stories you might want to check out my primer on publishing short stories – which goes through the many ways you can publish them, but also how you can use them for marketing purposes.

## Content Upgrade
This is where hyper-productive non-fiction authors can really shine, especially if they have a website like this one, and all sorts of content for their target audience to enjoy.
Content upgrades are context-specific reader magnets. An example might be this: imagine you wrote several books on financial planning. You might have a blog post on how to file your tax returns. A cool content upgrade you could offer at the bottom of that post might be a tax calculator.
And then if you had another blog post about controlling costs, you might offer a content upgrade specific to that post – for example a short guide to allowable business expenses.
Many readers in that target market would happily fork over their deets for either of those freebies. Tailoring freebies to the context can be very powerful indeed.
Do this on several of your most trafficked posts and your list will get a tremendous boost.

## Advanced Preview
Authors have tried generating interest in upcoming books by publishing previews directly on Amazon — but it’s a risky game. Even huge household names with loyal fanbases have incurred reader-ire with this approach, so tread very carefully indeed.
A safer way might be to avoid retailers altogether with this strategy, especially when it’s an open question how Amazon feels about the practice.
Instead, consider using your email list for this — somewhere you set the rules, and where there are less chances of reader misunderstandings (and no chance at all of angry one-star reviews!).
An advanced preview can function as a reader magnet, a general cookie for your list, or even a re-engagement cookie.
How might the latter work? Well, if life gets in the way and the next instalment in your series is delayed, some readers might become disengaged over time.
An exclusive sneak preview might be just the tonic which will convince them to hang around. Giving them just enough of a taste to keep them hooked on your product.

## Public Beta
If the last idea gave you heebie-jeebies, you might want to head for the panic room right now because we’re about to turn things up to 11.
Some authors write with the door closed — which is fine; whatever works. But non-fiction authors in particular might be intrigued by the idea of a public beta: letting readers paw through your upcoming release… and pull it apart.
I appreciate this might be nightmare fuel for some authors, and I would never do it with fiction, personally. But it can be a very potent tactic.
I gave away over 10,000 copies of the first edition of Amazon Decoded. It was only available as a reader magnet at the time; you couldn’t buy it anywhere, even though it was a book which was in high demand. (Enticing and exclusive, remember?)
At the back of the book, I didn’t have a hooky CTA. Instead, I invited readers to share feedback with me directly and then used that to explicitly shape the second edition — which was release as a full-length book 18 months later. One with a price tag.
It was a very successful launch, made me a fair bit of money, and if the Amazon reviews are anything to go by, readers loved the content too. Perhaps because they felt involved in the process — because they genuinely were.
Readers got a better book for their troubles too, one they were more than happy to pay for.
This isn’t a new tactic at all. Software companies and games and various online services have been doing versions of this for years. And I vaguely remember Guy Kawasaki doing something similar several years ago with his bestselling author guide Author, Publisher, Entrepreneur.
However, I wanted to share my direct experience with this one because it is kind of crazy. And to assure that, with the right circumstances, it really can work.

In case anyone wonders what the difference is between an advanced preview and a public beta, fair enough. Let me explain.
Advanced previews are giving people a glimpse of upcoming finished work, and the aim is to generate buzz or drive sign-ups to your list.
Public betas show unfinished stuff with the aim of incorporating feedback in the finished product, but can also generate buzz, sign-ups, or engagement as a happy side-effect.

## Audio Magnet
This is where I might lose you.
It’s one thing to give away a book which you have labored over, you might reasonably object, and quite another to give away an audiobook which you have labored over… and possibly invested thousands of dollars in as well; audiobook production costs can be considerable.
However, that’s not quite what I’m suggesting.
Audio magnets are exactly what you might think: a free short story, novella, or book in audio format which is offered as a sign-up bonus.
Why might you want to do such a thing? Well, for all the same reasons you might have a reader magnet: namely to attract audiobook consumers to your list.
If you have invested in audiobook production, you will be seeking to repay those costs. Marketing audiobooks can be challenging — we simply don’t have the same tools and strategies are still developing. But the audiobook market is growing fast and can be extremely lucrative.
Like many of the marketing options starting to spring up for audio, this will probably work best if you have (a) paid for production and are not involved in royalty-share entanglements and (b) are not exclusive to ACX.
If you are fully free to play around with your audiobooks, then you have a freer hand marketing-wise and can explore audio magnets, building up an audio-specific mailing list (or an audio-focused segment of your existing list), and even many of the previous options on this list in audio form instead.
And if that has your mind whirring about building up an operation to sell audiobooks directly to your fans, then you should really read this post from BookFunnel.

## Final Note From Dave:
I hope this post gave you some ideas, but also some confidence to use the power of free effectively and strategically.
It’s not about giving away the farm and then crossing your fingers and hoping for the best.
It most certainly is about coming up with new and creative ways to get readers to try your work, with the specific aim of converting them into lifelong paying customers.
A lot of the above ideas aim to drive more sign-ups to your mailing list, something that free offers are exceptionally good at. But to ensure you are making the most of your newsletter, check out these handy tips.
What about you? Do you use the power of free to grow your audience or generate future sales? Did this post give you any confidence or ideas? Let us know in the comments.

--------------------------

Amazon Recommendations & Also Boughts
Posted by David Gaughran 22 January 2022. Amazon • 19 Comments.

## The article starts below, but first: FREE STUFF!
Amazon recommendations drive millions of dollars of book purchases every single day, and Also Boughts are central to this system, which can lead to panic when they periodically disappear.
Also Boughts play an important role in Amazon recommendations — that process of pairing books to readers like some literary version of Tinder — but the exact role in Amazon’s recommender system can be misunderstood.
So let’s break it all down today. I’ll show you the exact role Also Boughts play in Amazon recommendations, and why you need to protect yours.
- What Are Also Boughts?
- How Amazon Recommendations Work
- Product Connections vs. Similar People
- Also Bought Myths & Benefits
- Personal or Contextual Recommendations
- Also Bought Pollution
- How To Protect Your Also Boughts
- When Gaming The System Goes Wrong
- Takeaway: Amazon Has Been Decoded
What Are Also Boughts?
How Amazon Recommendations Work
Product Connections vs. Similar People
Also Bought Myths & Benefits
Personal or Contextual Recommendations
Also Bought Pollution
How To Protect Your Also Boughts
When Gaming The System Goes Wrong
Amazon Has Been Decoded

## What Are Also Boughts?
Also Boughts reflect the other purchases your readers are making, and also influence which readers Amazon recommends books to next. As a result, Also Boughts have become the focus of attention among savvy self-publishers in recent years.
You can view them on any book’s product page on Amazon. You may have noticed a strip of books underneath the product description. It’s the section headlined with “Customers who bought this item also bought” which looks like this:
The Also Bought strip doesn’t update as frequently as some parts of the Kindle Store. It usually refreshes twice a week, on Thursday and Sunday evenings; they are an up-to-date indication of how Amazon views your book.
Experienced self-publishers watch Also Boughts closely. Amazon’s system is always trying to determine what kind of products each individual customer is most likely to purchase, so it can make better recommendations. One thing which is super important in this process is the connection between products. People who buy printers tend to buy ink.

But it’s not just obvious pairings like leathers and feathers. Amazon’s system is constantly analyzing what everyone purchases. It then tries to predict what customers will buy next by crunching All The Data.
The net effect when it comes to authors is this. If your book appears in the Also Boughts of a book in your niche which is selling well, this can lead to a noticeable increase in sales. Conversely, if something goes wrong with your Also Boughts, it can lead to a measurable dip.
It was understandable that authors would begin worrying when Amazon seemed to remove Also Boughts from book pages. Some even claimed that Amazon would stop recommending books organically, restricting visibility to those paying for Amazon Ads.
But that’s not how the recommender system works. And I can show you exactly what I mean.

Amazon makes millions of book recommendations to readers every single day. On-site, in various slots around the Kindle Store, and by email as well. These recommendations take many different forms.
Some Amazon recommendations are very top-down. But most are either personalized for each individual reader, or contextual — based on what the reader is viewing at that moment. Or the place they are in the Kindle Store. Even an action they just performed. All this is unaffected by Also Boughts disappearing from book pages.
Let me give you an example.
During the research process for my book Amazon Decoded, I conducted a number of revealing experiments.

Have you ever noticed what happens when you buy a book in the Kindle Store? Specifically, have you noticed what happens on-screen afterwards? Amazon never misses a trick and as soon as you complete payment, a confirmation screen appears recommending more books.
Amazon is split-testing things all the time. You may see this play out slightly differently each time you purchase a book. Commonly, you will see Amazon push the book in the #1 Also Bought slot pretty hard.
(Unless there is an audiobook edition which is Whispersynced, then Amazon will often favor that recommendation instead. It can experiment with other approaches, such as a carousel of books. But this will also be heavily influenced by the Also Boughts of what you just purchased.)
(Assuming your Book 2 is that #1 Also Bought, of course, and that your series metadata is in perfect shape.)
This is the kind of thing that doesn’t happen so much on the other retailers; they simply don’t have recommender systems as sophisticated as that powering the millions of Amazon recommendations every day.
Other retailers do have rudimentary recommendation engines. But Amazon is quite literally years ahead of the competition; it doesn’t feel like that gap is closing because different philosophies are in play.

The research process for Amazon Decoded unearthed some fascinating information about recommender systems generally and the associated data-crunching, machine learning, AI, algorithms – that big system for pairing readers with books they will love.
I learned how Amazon’s recommendation engine was the first to really map out connections between products, rather than people. How this was a great leap forward in the efficacy of recommender systems generally – to the extent that it is still studied by academics almost twenty years later, as well as by companies like Netflix, busy building their own such systems.

And here’s the pertinent bit. The process described above of “checkout recommendations” is completely unaffected by whether Also Boughts are at the top of your book’s product page in prime position, or if they are shunted down to the bottom of the page where most readers won’t see them, or if they are gone temporarily, or even if they are axed permanently.
The status of Also Boughts on your book’s page does not affect the underlying recommendation engine one bit. And these Amazon recommendations are what drive so many of our sales — probably most of the sales we aren’t directly responsible for ourselves, with our own marketing.
This is why any marketing push seems to go further on Amazon, versus other retailers, and why marketing campaigns tend to have a much longer “halo effect” on Amazon — even accounting for relative size. And this is why it’s often far easier for newer authors to bootstrap their way to success in the Kindle Store than anywhere else.

A common misconception is that it is the Also Boughts themselves – the strip of books on your product page – driving those sales and recommendations. However, it’s the underlying system, those connections mapped out between books, which is what triggers Amazon to often recommend Debbie Macomber to a reader after she purchases Nora Roberts.
This process doesn’t stop just because Also Boughts go away, the whole recommendation engine makes millions of suggestions to readers every single day and that system doesn’t come to a shuddering halt because Amazon wants to tinker with that slot on our book pages; I suggest that authors stop fretting about the general status of Also Boughts.
Of course, it would be better if Amazon would stop messing with Also Boughts altogether — I’m certainly not claiming otherwise.

The experimentation with this piece of real estate has been relentless, and increasing. I can think of a dozen different things Amazon has tried to shoehorn onto our book’s pages in the place of Also Boughts. Although I should also point out that these experiments have been going on for as long as I can remember – this is not a recent phenomenon, there is just more awareness among writers about Also Boughts these days.
And, yes, I will also grant that there is probably a moderate amount of on-page discovery. I’m sure some readers spot your book in someone else’s Also Boughts and purchase it instead, but also remember that cuts both ways.
Much more importantly, if we look at the typical CTR of an Amazon ad (there’s a wide range here but even a successful ad might be as low as 0.1%), this would seem to strongly indicate that the amount of on-page discovery that happens via Also Boughts has been greatly overstated.

Amazon recommends books to readers in many different ways. Some of those are very generalized, hand-picked recommendations like the Kindle Daily Deals. Others are larger selections of curated deals, which are then sorted algorithmically (like Kindle Monthly Deals, which tend to be sorted by Popularity).
Further types of recommendations are completely contextual – triggered by the category charts a reader regularly views. Or those recommendations which pop up on screen after a purchase. More again are 100% personalized; the books you see recommended to you on the homepage of Amazon are an obvious example.
Let’s be clear: this entire system of recommendations is unaffected by Also Boughts disappearing.

### Email recommendations
Amazon makes even more types of recommendations to readers – predominantly in the form of millions of targeted emails. Some of these emails are hyper-personalized in the sense that they are strictly based on your own purchasing habits, or your own browsing habits.
(Indeed, Amazon cycles between the two depending on whether the system thinks your purchase intent is strong, or if you are more at the discovery state of your buyer journey, and it does that by looking at your browsing patterns in quite a sophisticated way.)
Some of those emails will be contextual rather than personalized too – for example Amazon will often recommend you that #1 Also Bought again, around two weeks after your purchase of that original book.
Note that while Amazon does track what you are reading right now on your Kindle, and the pace you are reading it at, it doesn’t yet seem to filter that information into the recommendation engine.
The system isn’t that smart… yet.

### How it works today
Instead, you get a cruder form of recommendation, which seems to be mostly based on the time elapsed since your purchase, and is unaffected by something like whether you have finished the original book or not. It just seems to be time-based, rather than personalized or contextual.
Again, the really important thing I’m going to keep stressing: this part of the recommendation engine is completely unaffected by whether Also Boughts are currently appearing on your book’s page. Indeed, the entire recommendation engine is utterly unaffected by Amazon’s tinkering with these Also Boughts.
The mistake people are making is thinking that the importance lies with the Also Boughts themselves, but these are just a visual representation of the system on your page. They are not the system itself.
Also Boughts are just a symbol, if you like.

### The true advantages of Also Boughts
Having Also Boughts on your book’s page is nice. They look good – much better than the hodge-podge of Amazon Ads, that’s for sure. Also Boughts bestow a nice dollop of social proof and propel a moderate amount of on-page discovery, as we said earlier. They can help you claw back more of that crucial on-page real estate for you and your books, away from potential distractions like competitors and their Amazon Ads, or anything else that could tempt a reader away from your Buy button.
Also Boughts are desirable in other ways too.
For example, glancing at them on your book’s page is a quick-and-dirty diagnostic tool for your marketing. If they are scrambled, this is often a sign that Amazon has a poor sense of who your reader is, usually because your targeting is wonky and you are sending too many of the wrong people to your book’s page. Which is something you want to avoid.
I get all this. I’m not saying that stuff isn’t important. What I am saying that Also Boughts disappearing is not the crisis it is regularly depicted as. The Amazon recommendation engine is completely unaffected. And that, I respectfully suggest, is the most important thing here.
But the Also Boughts on your book’s page are important in other ways, ones which I do suggest authors should pay attention to.

Here’s what authors should really be worried about: Also Bought pollution. Because Also Boughts reflect the purchase history of your readers, it’s essential that you only target true readers of your genre.
A common mistake that authors make is getting a lot of friends or family or colleagues to purchase their first book, which is a nice way of showing support, but can really scramble your Also Boughts.

### Thanks for nothing, Steve
Let’s say your brother Steve usually reads sword-and-sorcery-type fantasies… but he buys your debut romance novel in support. This simple gesture could confuse Amazon as to who your readers are, hampering its ability to drive new sales. If there are enough Steves in the mix, Amazon may think you have written a very different kind of book. And will recommend you to all the wrong readers.
And if there is one thing Amazon doesn’t like, it’s recommendations which don’t convert into sales. So it will recommend your book less frequently in the future. A key sign that this might be happening to you is if your Also Boughts become scrambled. Watch out for a hodge-podge of books from outside your niche. This is called Also Bought pollution and it can be very difficult to fix.
Whereas if you have clean Also Boughts – where most are from your niche – then you are in much better shape; Amazon is probably recommending your book to the right type of reader.
Two examples should underline just what difference this can make to your book’s fortunes, and your bank balance.

### Case Study #1: Escape Velocity Achieved
When I released the second book in a series, it was essential to have the first book in the #1 slot of my Also Boughts. I needed Amazon to recommend Book 2 to whoever purchased Book 1.
To increase the chances of that happening, I ran a sale on Book 1 during the launch of Book 2, which then dutifully appeared in the #1 slot in the Also Boughts. It went on to have an excellent launch; both books continued to feed into the other for several lucrative months.
It doesn’t always go that smoothly.

### Case Study #2: The Death Spiral
Several years ago, I was launching a new series and decided to be quite aggressive with Book 1. I priced it at 99¢ and tried to foist it on anyone I could find – including readers of other genres.
Launch week itself went well and I racked up considerable sales. But when the Also Boughts finally kicked in (it takes around 50 sales on Amazon US, less elsewhere), I realized my mistake.
My Also Boughts were filled with off-genre books! Amazon then proceeded to recommend me to all the wrong readers – those who read thrillers and romance.
An impressive launch turned into a dead-cat bounce from which the book struggled to recover. A tough lesson to learn, but a valuable one.

Authors shouldn’t panic if Also Boughts get momentarily scrambled. It’s totally normal for Also Boughts to be all over the place for an update or two after your launch. Or after a big spike in downloads, like you might see after a BookBub Featured Deal or a Freebooksy promotion.
Fixing Also Boughts which are permanently scrambled can be very difficult. You need to organize a promotion even bigger than that which scrambled them in the first place. It’s much better to avoid that fate by being disciplined with your marketing.
You should only be aiming your marketing efforts at true readers of your genre; never fool yourself that a broader push outside your genre will work. That fantasy of being a breakout hit like Gone Girl or Ready Player One is dangerous. (And ignores that breakouts tend to dominate their genre before breaking out.)

### Reader targeting
This post on the importance of reader targeting goes into that idea in much more detail, but the basic point here is that it’s important to construct marketing plans which work with the Amazon algorithms, rather than against them.
The big takeaway from all this is that you need to find true readers of your niche, and then aim your marketing at them. Exclusively.
Be really careful about “adjacent audiences” as they can be the biggest traps of all. Especially when you are starting out. Don’t target Action & Adventure readers when your novel is at the more literary end of the historical spectrum. Don’t target erotic romance readers when your stuff is sweeter.
Yes, there might be some crossover, but if your Also Boughts get polluted, Amazon can then start recommending you to the wrong readers, which could create a death spiral which it is hard to break.
And the most crucial time to avoid that fate is when your book is first being launched; there is no sales history attached to it yet, and Amazon has no idea yet what kind of book it might be.

### Friends and family
When we start out, we’re desperate for sales. We can be overjoyed when Ma purchases our debut, or when a colleague picks up a copy… even though they might be more into mysteries. But that can hurt your book if it happens before you develop a sales history with readers of your genre.
Friends and family can show their support by buying your paperback. Or they can buy your ebook later on. But if your sales are exclusively made up of such purchases at the start, you are courting trouble. Just don’t be tempted into using cheap tricks; they can backfire.

## When Gaming The System Goes Wrong
I stumbled across a novel on Amazon some time ago which had shoehorned the phrase “Game of Thrones” into its subtitle.
This is known as title-keyword stuffing. You take what might be a popular search on Amazon and then shove it into your own subtitle… one way or the other. People do this to try and finagle extra visibility with readers searching for something insanely popular, like Game of Thrones.
It’s probably against the Amazon Terms of Service, but that’s not the point here. Rather, it’s about targeting the wrong readers. Because the book using this wheeze was a historical novel. It wasn’t even fantasy.
Now, the ruse didn’t work; this particular book doesn’t appear in the first five pages of searches for “Game of Thrones.” (I gave up after that.) But let’s imagine for a moment it did, and lots of epic fantasy readers had purchased this historical novel.
What would have happened? That’s right, his Also Boughts would have been filled with all the other things that epic fantasy readers buy. Namely, epic fantasy novels. And pretty soon after that, his reviews would be filled with angry readers too.
There is no gimmick that will fix bad Also Boughts. Nor is there one which will fill your Also Boughts with perfect books. You can’t skip the step of crafting a marketing plan. Just make sure it aims at the right readers.

## Amazon Has Been Decoded
Amazon Decoded breaks down the secret workings of the Kindle Store in a way that has never been done before. It examines each aspect of the recommendation engine. And shows you how to get Amazon to recommend your book more to readers.
Not only that, it will teach you how to construct marketing campaigns which will trigger recommendations to readers. How to make your book stickier in the charts. And how to launch books in a way that convinces Amazon takes over and does the selling for you.
You can buy it from Amazon, of course. But it’s also available on a wide range of other retailers too. Get purchase links for Amazon Decoded here for your preferred retailer.

--------------------------

Publishing Short Stories • Your Guide to Making Money
Posted by David Gaughran 22 January 2022. Writing • 47 Comments.

## The article starts below, but first: FREE STUFF!
Short stories are fun to write, but can you make money from publishing them? The quick answer is: maybe. But it’s almost certainly harder than you think, and the path to success with short stories can be circuitous.
Let’s begin by looking at the enduring popularity of short stories, including how a surprising number of much-loved movies were adapted from shorter work. But we will also contrast that with how difficult it is to get them published… unless you decide to self-publish your stories.
Another needed dose of realism for authors of short stories: the opportunities brought by ebooks and self-publishing haven’t led to the short story renaissance many hoped – except in certain niches. Nevertheless, some intrepid writers are using shorter work in new and clever ways to get attention, grow their readership, and make some money too.
Here’s your guide to publishing short stories in 2022:
- Famous Short Stories
- Short Stories, Novellas&Novelettes
- Short Story Markets: publishers, magazines, and self-publishing
- Selling Short Stories – the marketing problem
- Other Uses For Shorter Work: anthologies, box sets, and reader magnets
- Making Money As A Writer
Famous Short Stories
Short Stories, Novellas
&
Novelettes
Short Story Markets: publishers, magazines, and self-publishing
Selling Short Stories – the marketing problem
Other Uses For Shorter Work: anthologies, box sets, and reader magnets
Making Money As A Writer

## Famous Short Stories
In case the bluntness above has taken you aback, keep in mind that less experienced authors often have a very doe-eyed view of how lucrative the short story market might be – perhaps down to the outsized impact shorts have had on popular culture.
Some authors like Edgar Allen Poe practiced the form exclusively. Other famous names count their shorter pieces as some of their finest work, including Flannery O’Connor, Anton Chekhov, Luis Borges, Octavia Butler, Stephen King, Jhumpa Lahiri, Alice Munro, Joyce Carol Oates, Franz Kafka, Shirley Jackson, Lorrie Moore, Charles Bukowski, Alice Walker, William Trevor, and Kurt Vonnegut.

A surprising number of much-loved films were adapted from the shorter story: Memento, was originally a short by the director’s brother Jonathan Nolan, even if the movie came out before the literary version got published.
Others include:
- Eyes Wide Shut
- The Body Snatcher
- A Christmas Carol
- Zorro
- Stand By Me
- Brokeback Mountain
- Total Recall 
- Breakfast at Tiffany’s
- The Curious Case of Benjamin Button
- 2001: A Space Odyssey
- The Birds
- The Fly
- The Invisible Man
- Minority Report
- The Third Man
- Million Dollar Baby
- The Illusionist
- It’s A Wonderful Life
- I, Robot.
If we are allowing a broader view of what a short story is – and we’ll dig into that point presently – then we can also mention A Christmas Carol, Of Mice and Men, Billy Budd, Animal Farm, A Clockwork Orange, The Old Man and The Sea, and Heart of Darkness.
You might reasonably object – pointing out that some of these could be classified as novellas. Let’s get those measuring tapes out. How long is a piece of string?

There’s no strict definition of the length of a novel or short story – none that is universally agreed upon. However, a short story is most commonly defined as anything below 10,000 words. But some people say 7,500 words, others say 20,000.
For novels, the preferred length has been traditionally set by publishers and agents. Often in the region of 80,000 to 100,000 words – with big variations across genres and categories. Across time too, as fashions change. On top of all that, most novels are self-published these days, where anything goes.
The old rules around the economics of printing a physical book don’t hold much sway in a digital world; novels have been trending shorter since the rise of ebooks and self-publishing. Various writer organizations now peg the novel as starting at 40,000 words; sounds about right to me. But that does leave a big gap in the middle.
Many will consider anything between 10,000 and 40,000 words a novella. Some can slot in an even more arcane term (novelette) in between the short story and the novella. While others will call anything over 20,000 words a short novel, and anything below it a short story. A workmanlike solution, perhaps, but a neat one.
It doesn’t matter so much.

If we are focused on making money, we should be more concerned with what readers want. And what will sell – particularly as supermarkets keep stubbornly charging for food.
Worth noting at this point is that readers rarely use the term novella. Even fewer will have heard the term novelette, outside of literature students or those with authorial ambitions themselves.
Let’s cannonball into the swimming pool of gross generalizations; I suspect the general reader perception of such things would hew closely to our workmanlike framework above:
- up to 20,000 words = short story;
- 20,000-40,000 = short novel;
- 40,000+ = novel.
Just keep in mind those aforementioned genre variances can be quite extreme. Epic fantasies can breeze past 150,000 words without breaking a sweat. Whereas erotica readers (or wannabe CEOs perusing business books) usually get to the meat faster.
As with everything in this writing life, you can do whatever the hell you like; you’re the captain of your authorship. But if you want to sell you need to consider reader expectations. (And if you want to sell something to a publisher, you must factor in their often Byzantine requirements.)
For our purposes, I’ll explain the best ways to use anything below 20,000 words. But I’ll give some pointers on the rest as well.

You pretty much have three options:
- sell a short story collection to a publisher
- sell a single short story to a magazine
- self-publish short stories – either as singles or collections.
Well, you have three options in theory. The odds of the first are astronomical, the prospects of the second aren’t much richer. (Sorry, that’s the truth.) While the third option is certainly in your own clammy hands, it also comes with a plethora of new challenges.
There’s no sugarcoating it, but don’t be dissuaded; there is a path ahead for the adventurous short story writer.

### Short Story Publishers
Your dreams might include a short story collection published by a venerable New York House. The reality is that publishers only tend to acquire short story collections from the very most successful of their large stable of existing authors, and even then only in certain genres.
And even then, the publisher and agent would probably rather the author had written another novel instead – such is the respective commercial demand for short stories versus novels.
You don’t have to like it, but this is the harsh truth: an unknown author has virtually no chance of interesting an agent or publisher with a short story collection – especially if they don’t have a string of impressive magazine credits already.

### Genre exceptions
The exception here is specialist publishers in certain genres. Tor regularly publishes novellas between 20,000 and 40,000 words. Romance also has several publishers like Harlequin looking for shorter books in certain categories.
Slim pickings abound. But there are other routes to readers, some of which might be a much more profitable use of your time.

### Short Story Magazines
Once a mainstay of American life, demand for short story magazines has dwindled considerably since their heyday – as have the relative pay rates, which are essentially frozen since the 1950s.
Publishing a short story in a magazine is a wonderful experience nonetheless. Especially if you are popping your literary cherry, and particularly so if you actually get paid.
Pay is often nominal but getting a magazine credit can be a positive first step at the beginning of your writing career, and certainly was for this particular author.

### Magazine examples
For authors of literary fiction, famous magazines like The New Yorker, Paris Review, and The Atlantic might be top of their list, just keep in mind that the bar there is incredibly high and established authors – even famous ones – get rejected all the time.
Respected literary magazines include Ploughshares, Zoetrope, The Antioch Review, and Threepenny Review. Check them out if you write that kind of story.
Writers of humor will already know about McSweeney’s, surely. It remains a popular choice for submitters of short pieces in various forms.
And then various genre magazines round out things, such as Alfred Hitchcock Mystery Magazine and Ellery Quinn Mystery Magazine for all types of mystery, suspense, legal thrillers, and police procedurals. SF/F authors will want to check out the likes of Asimov’s, Clarkesworld, Amazing Stories, and Lightspeed as well.

### A handy resource
If you are seeking out more markets, or other genres, then Duotrope should be your first port-of-call. A handy resource for finding markets and tracking submissions.
I submitted to lots myself, back when I was querying agents and trying to get a traditional deal. Firing short stories at any magazine I could find in a desperate attempt to pad out my literary resume. I was rejected by most of them too… so there’s that.
But I did “sell” a short story to a small UK magazine. I use the scare quotes there because no money actually changed hands; instead, I received several comp copies of the magazine in question. A common enough form of “payment” for smaller magazines and newer authors.
However, I subsequently re-sold a version of that story later on, for actual money. It was then published in a hardback collection of the best stories of the year. A real, tangible milestone and something that gave me huge confidence. Especially the getting paid part.

### Money for old rope
I self-published that story later on, along with a couple more. An early and valuable lesson in intellectual property rights (and in making money, multiple ways, from a single piece of work).
Feel free to explore the world of magazines if you wish. It can be a very positive experience, as I said. Submitting to magazines can be disheartening and time-consuming. To give yourself any chance, familiarize yourself with the requirements, which can be strict, and particularly with their taste. (Leading to a situation at some where the audience is mostly writers trying to get published.)
Some authors get stuck in a rut. Submitting to magazines forever, and not really progressing. Definitely be aware that there is a whole world of possibility in the world of ebooks and self-publishing which might be more fruitful for you; it certainly was for me.

### Self-Publishing Short Stories
Because I am a passionate advocate for self-publishing, you might expect me to say that self-publishing short stories is nothing but sunshine and lollipops. But let me give it to you straight: it’s a tough way to make money. And there are certainly easier ways to make a literary buck, especially in the world of self-publishing. Let’s break it down.
As the publisher, you are responsible for everything. This doesn’t mean actually doing everything yourself – you will most likely be outsourcing specialized tasks like editing and cover design. But you will certainly be handling the marketing yourself, and this is the sticky point for short story writers.
Because there’s an inescapable truth: readers prefer novels. And not just any kind of novel, but a series too. The prospect of writing over 1000 pages when you have been struggling to write 10 might be overwhelming. Let’s park that for a moment and look at the self-publishing short story market in more detail.
Publishing short stories yourself is certainly one way to ensure your work reaches the marketplace of readers. Yes, you have many new things to learn if you want to do it right. But these are skills which will be incredibly useful to you over the course of a writing career.

### Warning: publishing is the easy part
Newer writers tend to look at me funny when I say publishing is the easy part. However, out of the three-step challenge facing authors today – writing, publishing, and marketing – it is by far the most straightforward. And experienced self-publishers know exactly what I mean.
Self-publishing in 2022 might seem more complex then when I started but the tools today are far superior. Plus the wild frontier of self-publishing is well mapped out now.
That doesn’t mean there aren’t any pitfalls for neophytes though, so tread carefully.
You can grab my free guide to self-publishing if you want to explore this path in more detail. Just make sure you don’t waste lots of money by using one of those terrible self-publishing companies who generate so many complaints.
I even have a companion video course walking you through book marketing basics. And that’s also free so definitely check it out.
But let’s be clear about something: the real challenge with short stories isn’t publishing them, it’s selling them. Especially in a world overflowing with novels.

## Selling Short Stories You Publish
When I was first weighing up whether to self-publishing – way back in 2011 – I decided to test the waters by publishing some short stories. It seemed like a low-risk way to learn the publishing ropes, and so it proved. At least as far as the publishing part went.
Learning all that stuff was so energizing. While one story was with the editor I wrote another from scratch – in a completely different genre, And then I repeated the trick right after.
It was quite the fillip after getting so many rejections from magazines (and from agents regarding my first novel). Indeed, within eighteen months I was a full-time author, living off the sales of my self-published books.
However, the sales from my short stories weren’t contributing a lot to that total. Like most other self-publishers, I soon discovered it was much easier to make money with longer work.
That doesn’t mean I stopped writing shorter pieces though. While shorts aren’t usually money-makers themselves in a direct sense, they really can help you in less obvious ways.
Sometimes short stories can lead you to unexpected places too, as George Berger found out when he queried Amazon’s Kindle Singles program.

## Other Uses For Shorter Work
The inventive world of self-publishing has come up with a number of handy uses for shorter work. Let’s go through them in turn:

### Anthologies
I’m sure you are familiar with anthologies. To properly distinguish them from box sets, anthologies are collections of short stories by different authors, usually around a chosen theme.
Authors either get invited to participate by the editor organizing the anthology (often a fellow author). Or they might respond to a call for submissions and get chosen – just like with a magazine. They can even act as the editor themselves and invite submissions.
Anthologies aren’t usually big money-making operations or chances to hit bestseller lists – although that can happen with strong promotion. Usually the aim is giving curious readers a taste of your writing, and leading them across to the rest of your catalog.

### Box sets
The difference with anthologies is that box sets are usually collections of novels (or sometimes novellas) by either a group of authors, or just one throughout.
In the case of the latter, you might wonder why an author might make a box set of her work. In particular, why she might sell it so cheaply. Well, the quick version is that pushing older books in this manner can be a powerful and aggressive marketing tactic. Especially with books whose sales have diminished.
Short stories come into the mix through providing bonus content – which can entice readers who already own some or all of the novels in the box set.

### Reader magnets
The most powerful tool any author has is their mailing list, And the very best way to boost sign-ups is by dangling a free story as a bonus for joining – often called a reader magnet.
Having an exclusive, free short story or novella as a sign-up bonus can act as a very powerful incentive for readers to join your newsletter, and it’s a particularly popular technique among savvy self-publishers seeking to grow their mailing list.
Short stories or novellas are handy as reader magnets because they can be written much more quickly than novels. However, using shorter pieces also opens up the possibility of writing custom reader magnets – such as a short story featuring a popular secondary character. When you have something which readers are crying out for, and they can only get it by signing up to your mailing list, sign-ups can go through the roof.
This tactic has been the biggest driver of mailing list growth for me – no question. And most other authors with a big mailing list will probably agree with that too.

If you are focused more on making a living as a writer, there is one inescapable fact: in almost every genre, it’s much easier to sell full-length books, and far easier again if those books happen to be part of a series.
Many writers start off writing short stories, but “graduate” to longer work and then either leave short story writing behind, or just engage in it for personal satisfaction – or perhaps for one of the advanced marketing uses mentioned above.
So if you are plotting out a writing career for yourself, short stories can be useful stepping stones in craft and career terms. But you should also have one eye out for a novel-shaped idea – even better if it is one with series potential. For more on that, particularly as it pertains the world of self-publishing, check out my post on publishing your own books.

It’s not all about making money though. Short stories can be a fun way to sketch out a new character or a space to test out a high concept, or a new genre for you as a writer. And sometimes the constraints of the form can lead to some powerful work.
It’s quite possibly an apocryphal story, but Hemingway is said to have won a bet among his fellow authors to write a complete story in just six words:
For Sale: Baby Shoes, Never Worn.
What about you? Do you like to write short stories? Have you had success placing them with magazines or with self-publishing? Are you interested in more advanced uses like box sets or reader magnets? Let us know in the comments.

--------------------------

The Great Ebook Pricing Question
Posted by David Gaughran 3 April 2021. Publishing • 164 Comments.

## The article starts below, but first: FREE STUFF!
Writers tie themselves into knots about ebook pricing when learning how to self-publish – and sometimes when they are more experienced too! But it can be quite simple, once you dispense with some rather popular myths.
As you will see, if you focus on income over price, the path forward becomes very clear – one which can be adjusted to suit your personal circumstances.
Price is not a hill to die on, but a powerful tool for levering your books into the charts, rewarding fans, generating buzz, and expanding your audience.
A tasty stew indeed. Let’s tuck in.

## Price-value confusion
Before we get to the nuts-and-bolts, it’s time to slay a zombie meme. Much of the distracting noise on this issue springs from conflating two concepts which should be distinct: price and value.
Authors often say something like, “My book is worth more than a coffee.” Or publishers might say, “A movie costs $10 and provides two hours of entertainment. Novels provide several times that and should cost more than $9.99.”
Price and value are two different things. From Wikipedia:
Economic value is not the same as market price. If a consumer is willing to buy a good, it implies that the customer places a higher value on the good than the market price.
The price is something we, as self-publishers, attach to the product. The value is the worth the consumer places on it (not the author or publisher). In simple terms, unless your price is lower than the value a reader places on your book, they won’t purchase.
Marketing isn’t simply about reaching consumers but also about convincing them to place a value on the product higher than the price tag. The higher the price, the harder that job will be.
In other words, it’s a lot easier to sell a book at $2.99 than $9.99.

## Doesn’t price influence value?
Do bargain basement ebook prices indicate low quality? Will a 99¢ price tag actually reduce the value a reader places on a book? That’s a harder question to answer.
In short, I think it’s true in some cases for some readers, but I also think it’s massively overstated.
It’s hard to sell a book at any price if you have a crappy cover, insipid blurb, wonky formatting, a flaccid sample and tons of terrible reviews – all cues to the reader about the value of the product.
If you have a striking, professional cover, an enticing blurb, clean formatting, a sample which grabs readers right away and lots of great reviews, then you can avoid any negative association with a lower price. Or, at the very least least, the number of readers you will gain through lower prices will greatly exceed any you might lose through such negative associations.
The data is clear: lower ebook prices shift more units, but that comes at the obvious cost of decreasing your take per sale. So how do you strike a balance? Well, that depends on your goals.
- Are you seeking to maximize income?
- Or are you willing to trade some of today’s income to build a bigger audience?
Authors who are exclusive to Amazon and enrolled in KDP Select will also be seeking to drive Kindle Unlimited borrows. Guess what? That can affect your pricing strategy too. Let’s look at each of these three scenarios.

## Goal: maximize income
It’s incredibly important to remove emotion from ebook pricing. Once you have dodged the price-value myth, the next step is to determine your goals.
If your goal is to maximize income, you should set a price which brings you closer to that goal. And you will only discover what the appropriate price point is through experimentation – it varies from book-to-book and genre-to-genre. For example, romance tends to have lower prices than historical fiction.
Most self-publishers tend to price full-length work at $2.99 or above, because this is the floor at which Amazon pays 70% royalties. Below that, Amazon only pays 35%.
Self-publishers also like to price at $4.99 or below, with many feeling that keeping the price below $5 keeps the purchase in impulse buy territory for many readers.
Repeated surveys from distributors like Smashwords indicates that pricing between $2.99 and $4.99 is a good rule-of-thumb for maximizing income.
Some advocate higher ebook prices again but I haven’t seen much data to support this view. I know a handful of self-publishers selling huge amounts at $9.99 a pop, but they are notable because they are anomalies.
You will need to test a few different price points to find your own sweet spot. Personally, I’ve found $4.99 best for full-length books. I’ve tried everything from free to $9.99, and $4.99 seems to maximize income.
I like this price point for a bunch of reasons. I make almost $3.50 per sale but it’s still below the psychological $5 threshold for readers. And it leaves me plenty of room for discounting when I run a promotion.
But maximizing income is just one potential goal to consider when pricing ebooks.

## Goal: build audience
You might make more money at $3.99 or $4.99, but you will sell fewer copies than at 99¢. If your goal is to build audience, then lower prices make much more sense. But when is it a good time to build audience instead of maximizing income? How do you strike a balance?
Successful self-publishers often price the first book of a series at 99¢ to increase the numbers of readers trying that first book. They make less on Book #1 but easily make that up when the reader goes on to Book #2 and Book #3. And the longer the series is, the greater the upside on a strategy like this.
In fact, this strategy is so successful that many series writers make the first book free. While you will lose all income on that title, it tends to massively increase the number of readers going on to purchase the rest of the series. This approach also benefits from being one of the few ways to gain traction on Barnes & Noble, Apple and Kobo.
It doesn’t work for everyone though and, as with ebook pricing in general, you should experiment to see which brings best results. If you do experiment with free in this way, don’t judge it after a week. Give it a couple of months.
Make sure to get some eyeballs pointing at that freebie by using some book promotion sites – that’s when you can really see the power of free.

## Goal: boost borrows
This isn’t the place for a lengthy digression on what drives Kindle Unlimited borrows, as it can get quite technical, but if you want to dive into that topic further you can read this post on the value of visibility on Amazon.
For our purposes here, you can just take it as a given that visibility on Amazon drives Kindle Unlimited borrows, and authors who are really racking up big page read numbers in 2021 have an entire strategy which revolves around maximizing that Kindle Store visibility – at the cost of almost everything else.
An aggressive approach, for sure, but one that most certainly pays off when the authors in question are racking up 10m-20m page reads a month. If you consider that they are getting almost half a cent per page read, well, you can calculate just how lucrative this approach can be.
While such a complex strategy isn’t realistic for most authors starting out, those who are in Kindle Unlimited can learn some lessons from the big dogs: in short, Kindle Unlimited authors can be more aggressive with ebook pricing and will often find that visibility boost will more than make up for it in terms of increased page read income.
Now I’ll deal with some objections…

### Shouldn’t e-books be priced more like print books?
No. You don’t own them, you only license them. And you can’t resell or donate them. Aside from that, it’s a digital product! There’s no paper, printing, typesetting, binding, shipping, storing, or returns. Yes, ebooks cost money to produce, but once you have covered your costs you can sell a billion more copies without incurring additional cost.
Print has all sorts of ongoing costs. When a book fails to sell as expected, publishers have to deal with returns. Even when a book is a runaway smash, publishers must go back to the printers and shell out for another round of printing, shipping and storing.
Ebooks are cheap to make. Readers shouldn’t be forced to pay for the inefficiencies of publishers, or subsidize print editions.

### Doesn’t all this cheap pricing devalue ebooks?
Well, no. Price and value are two different things. If you aren’t convinced by the foregoing, consider this: libraries have been providing cheap or free access to books for generations. Second-hand bookstores have been in existence for as long as regular bookstores. And all of the classics are available either as free e-books or extremely cheap paperbacks.
None of these long-standing phenomena have done anything to devalue books in readers’ minds. If anything it has done the opposite. And besides, shouldn’t we be in favor of making reading cheap? Don’t we want more people reading books?

### But… but…  what about the industry? Aren’t we training readers to only demand lower ebook prices?
Screw the industry! If publishers can’t compete at our price points, that’s their problem. And anyway, rather than inspiring a “race to the bottom” and “destroying the industry” author Ed Robertson argues convincingly that self-publishers are saving it with cheaper pricing – pricing he discovered is perfectly in line with paperback pricing from the 1930s to the 1970s until the industry began consolidating into today’s mega-sized publishers.

### This book took three years to write and it’s worth more than… [snip]
Okay. Maybe looking at it through the prism of price/value isn’t helping. Let me try something else. Instead of focusing on the price you’re selling at, focus on the income the book generates. How much do you make each month at $9.99 versus $2.99, $3.99, or $4.99?

## How To Decide Your Ebook Pricing
All this theory is fine and dandy, but let’s translate that into actionable steps for you so you can set your own ebook pricing, confident that it lines up with your aims.
- Determine your goals. 
- Experiment with different prices. 
- Evaluate the change in income.
It really is that simple.

--------------------------

Editing A Book • The 5 Stages In A Proper Edit
Posted by David Gaughran 22 January 2022. Writing • 88 Comments.

Editing a book is a complex, multi-part process best handled by experienced professionals, even if you are self-publishing, and even if you diligently spend a lot of time self-editing.
There are five main stages to editing a book to the proper standard. Although, some stages can be combined, repeated, expanded upon, or even skipped – depending on your individual needs. Which is a polite way of saying: depending on how much of a dog’s dinner you made of things.
As a regular maker of dog’s dinners, I have become intimately acquainted with all five stages. In this guide, I break down how to edit a book properly. And you’ll get options depending on your individual needs and budget.
Those five stages are: beta readers, self-editing, story editing (which you may know as developmental or content editing), copy editing, and, finally, proofing. It’s important to note there isn’t one correct way to edit a book; you need to develop your own process. You will find advice on that below as well, along with help on finding an editor.
- Beta readers
- Self-editing
- Story editing
- Copy editing
- Proofing
- Your editing process
- Finding an editor
Beta readers
Self-editing
Story editing
Copy editing
Proofing
Your editing process
Finding an editor

## Beta readers
A beta reader gives feedback on early drafts so the author knows what needs to be improved. Writers can be blind to flaws in their own work; they have the whole story in their heads… regardless of what actually made it onto the page. A third-party has the requisite emotional distance to spot such omissions. They come at your book cold, pointing out any deficiencies.
Beta readers often focus on big picture stuff – story problems. Do your jokes hit the mark? Is the core romance believable? Did that big ending work? Are your characters fleshed out? Is the dialog natural? And so on.
Authors use beta readers in different ways – and some don’t use them at all! Although it is quite common to lean on them more heavily when writing your first few books. Then using them considerably less when you are more experienced or dispensing with them altogether.
Some authors will seek feedback from beta readers after every draft, or on particularly thorny sections more than once. Others will only use beta readers at a particular point – like after the final or penultimate draft.
Personally, I have always liked using beta readers after the second draft. Then I use my final, third draft for incorporating whatever feedback resonated with me, as well as general polish. You will have to plot your own path but feel free to experiment with different approaches.
Anyone can act as your beta reader, but remember that fellow authors often make the best beta readers of all. Whoever fills the role, make sure it’s someone willing to give you blunt and honest feedback. It might sting more (spoiler: it does sting more!).
Every beta reader is different, but I usually ask them to focus on story stuff – big picture issues; the actual text will probably be polished anyway. What I really need to know is whether the big twist works, or if my villain is compelling enough.
Finally, remember that you are not compelled to accept all feedback. You are the ultimate arbiter of your work, for good or ill. Developing the requisite judgement is part of the job. However, at the beginning you might benefit from multiple beta readers and listening closely when the same issues crop up.
Beta readers can only help so much; the yeoman’s work of editing a book is next.

## Self-editing
Make no mistake: self-editing is not a replacement for professional editing. Nor is it optional for those already planning a professional edit. It’s a compulsory step when editing a book regardless.
An editor is absolutely essential. But even the best editor is limited by the manuscript in front of them.
The more you can improve your manuscript before firing it over to your editor, the better the final product will be. Self-editing will also improve your overall skill as a writer. It will teach you to stop repeating the same mistakes over and over again.
Although if my experience is anything to go by, this just means you will make new and better mistakes. Reader, I’m a work in progress too.
To learn more about this essential process, I strongly recommend you read my comprehensive guide to self-edi-explained/)ting. Well, I say “mine” but I invited along a professional editor to write it for you; it’s a bumper post of over 5,000 words of superb editorial advice.

## Story editing
Story editing is often known as developmental editing (or dev editing for short), or content editing, or even substantive editing.
It’s also by far the most expensive type of editing, unless you wander into the sometimes murky world of book coaches (where you could end up shelling out thousands and thousands of dollars).
Developmental editors look at big picture stuff to do with your overall story: is your hero weak sauce? Is the love interest annoying? How can you fix the giant plot hole in Chapter 7? Does the cliffhanger work? Did readers feel… nothing when Supposedly Hilarious Sidekick died? That kind of thing.
Most self-publishers will use beta readers instead of hiring a developmental editor because they are just so expensive. (Developmental editing is very time-consuming; editors aren’t some form of literary brigand). Authors incorporate feedback from beta readers, in conjunction with doing multiple drafts and several self-editing passes.
Newer authors may be keen on a developmental edit but I recommend exploring options like a manuscript assessment instead. Rather than a line-by-line commentary, you will receive an overall report on the story aspects, replete with concrete examples. And that is usually more than enough to get started on those bigger story issues.
Regardless of your exact approach, what a story edit won’t do is look at language use, or grammar, or mechanics. For that you need a copy edit.

## Copy editing a book
Copy editing doesn’t look at story stuff at all, but things like spelling, grammar, and punctuation as well as general language usage and overall style.
Traditionally, there would have been a separate stage of line editing beforehand, focusing on style. However, copy editors serving the self-publishing market understand that these roles are basically combined these days; your copy editor should look at your overall language usage – things like repetition and clarity and clunkiness and simply whether a sentence scans correctly – as well as eliminating errors throughout.
All those successive drafts and beta reads and self-editing can result in sentences which just get all tangled up; a good copy editor should help you straighten it all out. This is the final polish, but not the final step.

## Proofing
Proofing is the very last stage in editing a book. After that, your manuscript is locked down. (And feasting may commence).
You can handle this in-house if you have an eye for spotting errors; all that temping I did in college paid off. Do note that authors can be particularly blind to errors in our own work.
I find it beneficial to proof the text in a different context. By this I mean printing the whole thing and taking it to a cafe. Or even quickly formatting my book so I can read it on my Kindle somewhere outside the house. (This is another good reason for authors to buy a Kindle – indeed it’s the original reason I got mine.) You will be amazed how many fresh errors you spot when reading your book in a different format.
Whether you outsource this step or do it yourself, just make sure someone scans the text for typos; they will surely be there, even with the best copy editor in the world.

## Designing a process for editing a book
Every writer is different and should develop their own individual process for editing a book.
Some authors will only do one draft but will constantly cycle back and make changes as they go along. Others write multiple drafts, going over the text from start to finish as many times as necessary, focusing on a different aspect each time.
Most typical is probably your classic three draft author, but do whatever works best for you personally; there’s no Right Way here.
You will also see a lot of variation on the editorial side. Some authors use developmental editors, others prefer beta readers (and everyone can use betas at different stages).

### My own process
The first draft is what I call the “vomit draft” – sorry! It’s when I try to get the bones of the story down before I lose the will to write it. This tends to be a really rough draft, hence the moniker. No one gets to see it so I don’t really care about unfinished scenes, spelling mistakes, cardboard characters, non sequiturs, or plot holes. I tend to fix all that in the second draft. When finished, I send it off to betas. (Although, I use those far less now that I’m more experienced.) When their feedback lands in my inbox, I incorporate whatever was useful in the final draft.
That third draft is usually my final one, unless the book has serious problems, and it’s all about polish. Making the dialogue crackle. Injecting some voice into those descriptions. Using language more efficiently so the end result is leaner and meaner.
Then it’s all ready for the copy editor. When she’s finished tearing it to pieces (and I’m done moping), I make all the changes that I agree with. This tends to be most of them, once I let that feedback… simmer a little. I handle proofing personally and then, finally, I’m done!
My process won’t necessarily be your process – you will discover what works best for you over time.

### Minimum recommended editing set-up
- self-edit your book until it’s as good as it can be
- hire a professional copy editor and incorporate the necessary changes, and then 
- proof your manuscript until you eliminate all typos and errors. 
Newer authors will almost certainly want to also add some extra TLC at the story stage as well. Whether that’s a full-on developmental edit, a manuscript assessment, heavy self-editing, successive rounds of beta readers, or some combination thereof, those still learning their craft will likely need extra help there.

## Finding an editor
Newer authors can be intimidated by the prospect of finding an editor. But the process is not much different from hiring any other professional, whether that’s a plumber or a lawyer.
Whoever you ultimately work with, it’s usually a good idea to do a sample edit first to ensure you work well together. Every editor has their own style; not all author-editor pairs are meant to be. A sample edit can spot issues ahead of time – for both sides – and most editors are happy to do it.
As for finding your own editor, a referral from a trusted source is often best – just make sure it’s an experienced editor who knows what they are doing. But you have a few options here:
1. Crack open some of the best self-published books in your genre and Google the editor’s name; they will often have a website with rates quoted.
2. Seek a referral from an author you know. Writers are always happy to share their experiences with editors and other service providers, and recommend the good ones.
3. Check out my personal recommended list of providers – which you get as part of my free guide to self-publishing.
free guide to self-publishing

--------------------------

Amazon and the Myth of the A9 Algorithm
Posted by David Gaughran 22 January 2022. Amazon • 13 Comments.

## The article starts below, but first: FREE STUFF!
There is more nonsense written about Amazon than almost any other topic because mere mention of Amazon will get you more clicks than anything else, and the “A9 Algorithm” might be the most curious example of all.
Amazon also happens to be an incredibly divisive subject generally, one of those where little nuance seems to be permitted — and someone writing articles about Amazon tends to regularly get labeled a “shill” or a “hater,” depending, sometimes off the back of the same piece!
But that doesn’t dissuade anyone, really, because talking about Amazon can also be quite lucrative. The currency of the internet is attention — as I think was once said by Jeff Bezos, although I’m scared to Google it in case I start getting hunted down on every corner of the internet with hyper-personalized ads offering to make me a Kindle Publishing Millionaire or help me build a Drop Shipping EMPIRE.

## The A9 Algorithm
Internet marketers are not known for their rigorous application of the scientific method. One intrepid black-hatted pioneer will discover a tasty data-morsel, dress it up in distracting finery, and then parade it about as part of a $2000 course. And then a dozen more will riff off that for their own courses and Patreons and books and masterminds and exclusive online workshops and virtual conferences; it’s like the most expensive game of telephone ever.
Sadly, it’s also quite value-free if you like hard facts.
This kind of environment shows some of the drawbacks of the brave new world ushered in by the internet and Google. If search for the phrase “amazon algorithm,” for example, the very first result is an article titled “Everything You Need To Know About Amazon’s A9 Algorithm,” and my BS alarm immediately goes off — use of the singular “algorithm” is a dead giveaway that the person doesn’t have a clue what they are talking about. Use of “A9” in this manner is another.
Indeed, the author of that article is a content marketer, presumably ranked first because the site he is writing for has solid SEO. Of course, it doesn’t reference a single bit of research to back up its claims.
Algorithms aren’t infallible, people.
Google “A9 algorithm” specifically, and you will fall even further down the rabbit hole — a giant, seething mess of articles dissecting this “A9 Algorithm” and speculating about how to apply it so you can increase sales of your drop shipping empire (or Kindle Publishing business — note these guys never talk about writing books, just publishing them, but I digress).

This talk of “the Amazon algorithm” and the “A9 algorithm” sometimes seeps over into our quaint world of publishing books we have actually written. Usually via a few disreputable course sellers in our space, who probably learned the lingo in a previous mastermind they attended and spotted an opportunity to sell this brand of snake oil to authors.
Which is why you get people claiming now, with a straight face, that there is one “Amazon algorithm” or that the “A9 algorithm” is what you need to wrap your head around to have success in the Kindle Store.
This self-referential nonsense reached its apogee when someone heard I was writing the second edition of Amazon Decoded. One of my mailing list subscribers emailed me asking about the “A10 algorithm” and what it meant for authors.
Because I have worked in this sector since the early 2000s, and because I’ve known what A9 actually is since it was first rolled out to the public in 2004 (I’ll return to that) — I immediately smelled a rat.
Nevertheless, I headed over to my trusty search engine again to see if I could garner any information about this mysterious “A10 algorithm” which I somehow missed in all my years studying and researching and writing about this topic.
Not only did I discover a whole group of people pontificating  on the “A9 algorithm” and the “A10 algorithm,” one enterprising soul was even selling the secrets of the “A11 algorithm” — no doubt after reinvesting the profits from his 6-Minute Abs video.
There was no mention of an “A8 algorithm” at all. Which is a pretty giant clue that the Drop Shipping Emperor is wearing no clothes.
I could describe this all as one big misunderstanding, except being utterly wrong about Amazon is as lucrative as it is damaging. The people who are spreading this BS are lining their pockets — often taking the money from hard-up authors who don’t have much to spare, then sending them off in the wrong direction. Authors who will then switch focus and change strategies based on something which is wholly illusory.
Here’s the real story.

I was working at Google in 2004 when it was in the process of overtaking Yahoo as the #1 search engine on the planet — which was kind of important as ads beside search results were becoming the biggest money printing machine in history.
Search was the hottest commodity in tech, as a result, and everyone wanted a piece of the action — including Jeff Bezos, who was one of the earliest investors in Google, everyone seems to forget.
Those of us working at Google at the time were closely watching any potential competitors, and even though Amazon wasn’t the most obvious candidate for that title, it had been making acquisitions which pointed towards the possibility that it was moving into Google’s territory: BookPages, Telebook, IMDb.com, Alexa (back when that referred to an internet traffic statistics company), LiveBid.com, Accept.com, Leep Technology Inc., Egghead Software — Amazon even dropped a cool $250m, back when that was more than chump change to Jeff Bezos, on a company called Junglee which it didn’t even launch on the market for another 14 years.
Talk about taking the long-term view!
More seriously, what’s clear now is that Amazon was after something else when buying all these companies, and you can see — with the clarity of hindsight — how many of these acquisitions were stripped down and incorporated into Amazon’s giant AI-powered recommendation engine, that massive system driven by all sorts of algorithms, gobbling down huge amounts of data 24/7, and applying machine learning constantly to successfully pair customers with products.
A9 seemed different though, and definitely got Google’s attention.
Amazon’s new subsidiary seemed properly independent. It was launched publicly in September 2004, after several months in beta and quietly powering Amazon’s search facility, as well as working away on other things, like ads.
A9 was a proper, customer-facing search engine — which people also seem to forget — one aiming to be the next Google, rather than destined to work in the background running Amazon’s search box. And it really did seem like an genuine play for of the overall search business, rather than a data-harvesting effort.
Google was watching it keenly — it had far more respect for Amazon’s leadership team than those running its supposed nemesis at Yahoo. I remember the feeling internally that Yahoo was toast and it was just a matter of time before reality caught up with the inevitable, even if it seemed neck-and-neck to outsiders at the time. And A9 was genuinely innovative in the search space, unlike Yahoo.
A9 was doing StreetView before Google, for example, although A9 called it BlockView. It also had very sophisticated algorithms which remembered your search history and used that to personalize results along with things like your bookmarks and calendar — the first search engine to really do this. And the way A9 was set-up, it was designed to work best if you had its useful toolbar installed. Which basically meant it was tracking all your browsing history, of course.
Hey, maybe it was a data-harvesting operation after all!
Or maybe it was simply that Amazon — like any good engineer — never throws anything out without stripping it for parts first. And Amazon really did seem to try and make A9 work as a public-facing search engine, even launching its own version of Google AdWords, and using that system to deliver ads on Amazon.com also. All of which would be a precursor to Amazon Ads.

## A9 Goes Dark
By 2008, Amazon conceded that Google’s trajectory was unassailable and folded up A9 — at least as a public-facing search engine, using it instead to power Amazon’s search, while also diverting some of those A9 resources to help with algorithms generally, parts of its recommendation engine, as well as things like ads (for example, A9 came up with Kindle with Special Offers, which would eventually turn into AMS lockscreen ads and AMG).
A key point: the recommendation engine was already in full swing before A9 was even conceived — something else that is missed by all these hucksters. Amazon had already made its great leap forward in terms of recommender systems, long before A9 came into being.
If these internet marketers spent any time looking beyond their circle-jerk of masterminds, which I believe is the appropriate collective noun, they might have noticed that the engineers and data scientists which built Amazon’s recommendation engine have written multiple papers on how it all works, making a surprising amount of detail public, including aspects of the various algorithms — note the plural — which feed into different parts of it, and explaining how, where, and when exactly Amazon built different aspects, and the specific ways it was innovative, and how it moved recommender systems forward (to the extent that Amazon’s approach is still broadly used by people like Netflix and YouTube today).
And if they looked a little harder, they might also have found various presentations that Amazon routinely makes — even today — at conferences to developers which explain all this stuff quite clearly, if you can wade through pages of engineer-speak, which is not for the faint-hearted, let me tell you.
Here’s the thing. You won’t find a mention of the “A9 Algorithm” anywhere in these papers or talks.

## The A9 Algorithm Doesn’t Exist
Which is weird, right? Unless you posit this: there is no such thing as the “A9 Algorithm.” My madcap theory also neatly explains why there has been no “A10 Algorithm” replacing it too, you will note.
Think that’s a crazy idea? Here is an Amazon engineer being pretty explicit:
There is no single A9 algorithm.
Not convinced by one source? That’s cool. Here is A9 themselves in a quote from their archived website:
Our ranking algorithms automatically learn to combine multiple relevance features.
Note the plural!
And here’s the most hilarious part, the name A9 literally means algorithms. It’s a geeky in-joke, a numeronym: A + 9 more letters. Algorithms. Plural.
I sometimes wonder what Amazon thinks when looking at this firehose of BS. People spending thousands of dollars on courses teaching them about algorithmic unicorns. The sad thing is, the misunderstandings don’t start or end with thinking that the entirety of Amazon is powered by one single superpowered “A9 Algorithm.”
There is another problem with listening to this crowd of blustering black-hatters, these drop shipping dingbats: they have built misunderstanding on misunderstanding. They think search is exclusively powered by this all-conquering “A9 Algorithm” and think the only thing that matters on Amazon is supposedly tweaking your products and metadata and marketing to gain the favor of our A9 Overlord.

## How Amazon Really Works
In reality, appearance in search is determined by a number of algorithms, and a number of different factors, including metadata and Popularity and relevance.
And search is only one tiny component of the overall recommendation engine, all of which is powered by many more different algorithms. And huge chunks of this recommendation engine are much more important to authors than search — for example Sales Rank. Which also has nothing to do with search and predates A9 by years anyway.
Also Boughts are another. Although as I explained elsewhere, it’s not Also Boughts which are important, as much as the connections between products they represent. Either way, that system of mapping connections between products has been informing recommendations to Amazon customers since before A9 ever existed.
And it uses an algorithm or two, as you might imagine.
So be very careful when you hear anyone talk about the “A9 Algorithm” or when anyone uses the word “algorithm” as a singular. Be skeptical if anyone starts talking about “ranking in search” as being critical to an author’s success — particularly an author of fiction — and it’s absolutely crucial not to confuse ranking in search with Sales Rank, which is a very different thing.
There are far more important aspects of the Kindle Store which authors should focus on, things that really do determine whether your book gets recommended to readers.
This “A9 Algorithm” BS is usually a sign that someone doesn’t have a clue about how Amazon works, or what authors need to focus on, for that matter, or what they can safely ignore, and how they can use all this information to sell more books.

## Further Resources:
This post on Also Boughts gives you some more background on Amazon’s recommendation engine, and how it was conceived, as well as breaking down how it actually works in practice, and how Also Boughts feed into that — and it’s not what you think! As a bonus: you get to stop stressing about Also Boughts disappearing from your book pages.
And then all of that should whet your appetite for my book Amazon Decoded, which breaks down how all the algorithms powering the Kindle Store and the millions of book recommendations made to readers every single day and how authors can get Amazon to start recommending them.

--------------------------

Self-Editing Explained: How To Edit A Book Yourself [Guide]
Posted by David Gaughran 3 April 2021. Writing • 104 Comments.

## The article starts below, but first: FREE STUFF!
The topic of self-editing can spark confusion so I’ve invited along a professional editor — one I’ve worked with on multiple books — who will show you how to edit a book yourself. And this is exactly where we run into the first misconception about self-editing because it’s not a replacement for proper editing, but one of the stages of the editorial process.
- What is self-editing?
- Back to basics
- Wordy verbiage
- Comma splices
- Dialogue dilemmas
- Wrong word choice
What is self-editing?
Back to basics
Wordy verbiage
Comma splices
Dialogue dilemmas
Wrong word choice

## What is self-editing?
Self-editing is an important stage in self-publishing a book – or preparing one for a traditional publisher. It’s the process an author goes through before they send their work to an editor; it is not a replacement for editing by a qualified, experienced, professional editor.
There is only so much work an editor can do to improve your manuscript in the allotted time, and self-editing enables authors to remove the more obvious errors so that a professional editor can really go to work on deeper issues.
If you want your work to really shine, you must make it as good as you possibly can before you hand it over to a professional editor.
And it’s a professional editor’s perspective that I think you will find most useful on this topic, so I have invited along Karin Cox to run through some of the ways that authors can self-edit their work and get it in better shape before they send it off to be copy edited.
As Karin says herself:
The more you polish your own work when self-editing, the less a professional editor will have to do, which will save them time and save you money.
Karin has a unique perspective: she has considerable experience working for a trade publisher in Australia and is also a freelance editor. On top of that, her own work — both fiction and non-fiction for children and adults, as well as poetry — has been published the traditional way and has been self-published; she really has seen all sides.
I also have first-hand experience of her impressive pleonasm-hunting skills as well as her uncanny ability to turn my sopa de letras into intelligible prose — which is no mean feat. Let’s just say that even after I spent considerable time self-editing, Karin earned her keep.
Here’s Karin with examples of some of the most common language issues she sees in manuscripts, just be aware that your own self-editing will need to encompass story problems as well.

Let me start off by stating that there is no such thing as self-editing to a publishable level (at least not without a team of skilled beta readers); I would say this even if my livelihood did not depend on editing.
I scour my own text for errors before I submit it to my publisher, but I am still always surprised at what my in-house colleagues pick up when they read through my manuscripts.
As much as writers attempt to edit their own work, and should for the purposes of enhancing their drafts, I firmly believe they are incapable of doing so as effectively as a professional editor because they lack the necessary objectivity to assess their own writing, even when self-editing with diligence.
The human brain also employs all kind of tricks to convince writers that what they put down on the page is correct (if not Man Booker Prize material).
Taht yuo cna raed tihs at lal is prcaticlaly a mriacle! But such is the power of the human brain. Read a whole paragraph of that and soon you’ll be able to wade through even the most atrocious, unedited drivel and make perfect sense of it.
It is little wonder that most authors — even those who are competent self-editors at a draft level — miss a few transposed letters, misspelled words, homonyms, or misplaced modifiers. It’s all thanks to the human brain’s excellent ability to decode and process what the eyes see.
However, knowing that some Indies cannot afford to employ a professional editor, and that any self-editing you undertake will streamline the editorial process and vastly improve your writing, what follows are five of the most common editorial issues I find in manuscripts that cross my desk.
Many professional Indies will scoff at this list, declaring it small fry — and much of it is — but you’d be surprised how often authors make these mistakes.

Some ambitious authors regularly find unnecessary cause to heartily and readily pepper their wordy prose with long-winded, superfluous, and exceedingly boring adjectives and adverbs, continually.
See what I did there?
This kind of writing constitutes an adjective and adverb overload. Adjective overload is usually found in descriptive passages, and adverb overload in dialogue. When most of us write, we are relaying a scene we have visualized in our minds.
As a result, we sometimes think that providing all of the rich detail we imagine will make the scene more vivid for the reader, who will feel almost as if they are watching a movie. Unfortunately, it rarely turns out that way.
Reading is a different exercise to watching a movie. Providing the reader’s brain with too much visual or sensory information too quickly can actually befuddle it. Rather than getting a clear picture of what is happening in a scene, the reader gets a fuzzy, out-of-focus mess.
Because they’re not sure what they will need to recall later, readers will be trying hard to process all of that information, which distracts them from the real task at hand — comprehending. The brain just isn’t able to hold all of that visual detail in there while you get to the “verbs” (action), so it just switches off.
Take for instance:
The girl walked into the long, dim, stone-floored corridor lit only by the softly glowing beams of candles in carved pewter candlestick holders that lined the grey stone walls where richly embroidered tapestries danced in the slight draught. The candlelight flickered off her beautiful emerald-green, floor-length dress made out of Chinese silk flecked through with gold, which left one of her pale shoulders bare, revealing the small scar where she had been nicked by Zhung-ze’s katana as a small girl. At the end of the gloomy hall stood a shadowy assassin wearing an ominous black robe and holding a giant, heavy bronze battle-axe engraved with the curious symbols of the Wey Tu Mutc clan.
Phew! There’s a lot going on in this scene, isn’t there? Short answer: not really. The only action is a girl with an interesting scar walking into a candlelit corridor with an assassin at the end — that’s it.
There is a lot of good sensory information in there, but it is obscured by all of the padding and setting. It could be more effectively written as:
The girl’s green silk gown swished on the stone floor as she entered the corridor. Flickering light from candelabras lining the walls made her pale skin glisten, illuminating the small scar on her shoulder where Zhung-ze’s Katana had nicked her as a child. At the end of the corridor, the assassin’s black robes billowed in the draught. He lifted his heavy axe in anticipation. On the bronze weapon, the engraved symbols of the Wey Tu Mutc clan shone in the candlelight.
Even with thirty-four words pruned off the original, I think you’ll agree that the second version provides a clearer visual image of the scene? Of course, the above is far from perfect, but it’s simply to illustrate my point about how self-editing can improve a passage.
Ninety per cent of the longer manuscripts I get sent are rife with adjective and adverb overload.
Some authors (such as Stephen King in On Writing) suggest ditching adverbs entirely and even go as far as insisting there is never any reason to use them. I disagree.
Sometimes adverbs can add spice to your writing while allowing you to remain succinct. Take the following example:
“Because I love her,” Dan said dispassionately.
The therapist said nothing. Removing her glasses, she carefully wiped the lenses with a tissue while waiting for him to continue. When he did not, after several seconds she asked, “Really?”
There are three adverbs in this passage (dispassionately, carefully and really). I believe all of them have some role to play.
If the author were to remove “dispassionately” when self-editing, the reader might well assume Dan’s statement were true, which would remove the subtext of this passage. As it is, the adverb provides a clue that Dan’s words and his feelings are not in accordance.

The therapist “carefully” wiping her lenses helps flesh out her character. Although this is the most dispensable adverb in this example, it underscores that she is a thorough, analytical person. She is not giving her glasses a cursory swipe with a tissue.
Incidentally, the glasses also provide [metonymy here. They represent her clarity of purpose and foresight, her ability to peer more closely into Dan’s thoughts and feelings to see the truth about his life.]
The final adverb here (really) demonstrates that she is aware Dan is not being truthful, even if he does not realise it. It could perhaps be replaced with “Do you?” But I think that “Do you?” would be slightly less accusatory. She is calling him on it, so “really” makes that more clear.
There is a way to recast this passage to remove all of these adverbs when self-editing and still keep some undercurrents in the conversation between Dan and his shrink, but it would require more words.
“Because I love her,” Dan said, knowing he did not mean it.
The therapist said nothing. Removing her glasses, she wiped the lenses with a tissue, careful to cleanse them of even the smallest smear, while waiting for him to continue. When he did not, after several seconds she asked, “Do you?”
Some writers who have bought into the “Adverbs are bad M’kay” school of writing advice will prefer the second example; others will prefer the first. In defense of adverb haters, in many cases adverbs are used as to prop up weak nouns, especially when it comes to dialogue attribution. It is true they can often be removed when self-editing to strengthen text. Following are some common culprits:
- “Get out!” he said loudly. (Substitute “he shouted” or remove the attribution as the exclamation mark and context make it clear he is shouting.)
- “I love you,” she said softly. (Substitute “she whispered”).
- “You complete me,” she said honestly. (This adverb is best removed unless there is a specific reason for doubting her honesty in the first place, e.g. she is a compulsive liar.)
- She ran swiftly toward him. (She sprinted, she bolted, she pelted, she tore)
- He walked slowly. (He ambled, he loped, he strolled)
- He smiled happily. (He beamed or he grinned).
Note: Take care not to use “he/she smiled” after dialogue, e.g. “Whatcha doing,” he smiled. No one is capable of “smiling” words. However, you can insert it as an action following dialogue by using a full stop and capital letter in place of a comma, e.g. “Whatcha doing?” He smiled. Persistently using dialogue tags that are impossible is the mark of the amateur.]
“I hate you,” she said spitefully. Now, I know I’m going to cop some flak for this, but in my own writing I would use “she spat” here. But … but … You said you can’t smile words, so how can you spit them? I can hear you flak-throwers thinking.
My answer to that is: I’m sure all of us have been spat on accidentally at least once when someone we were chatting with was being over emphatic. Also, language doesn’t have to be literal all of the time.
Another option might be:
“I hate you,” she said, enunciating each word.
Or, if you really want to push boundaries:
“I. Hate. You.” She spat out each word.
A worthwhile exercise is to set aside one edit of your draft where you do nothing but go through your manuscript and pinpoint adjectives and adverbs. Assess whether each is necessary and identify the role it plays.
If an adverb is not enhancing meaning, aiding characterization or providing subtext, strike it out. Where an adjective follows a string of other adjectives (especially if you have three or more adjectives in a sentence) delete the weakest one.

Not knowing, where to put commas, some authors believe, that the best way to avoid seeming as if they don’t know, is, just to, put them in, entirely randomly. Do not do this! I’ve read a lot of comments on forums suggesting that commas are entirely subjective. The rules are: there are no rules. Right? Wrong!
While “rule” is too strong a word, there are conventions regarding comma use. Just thwacking a comma down whenever you pause for breath, or whenever you freeze up momentarily when tapping away at the keyboard, is not going to cut it.
Some commas, however, are a matter of personal preference and are called “pausal” commas. Old-school grammarians mostly favor pausal commas; more modern grammarians tend to advocate using as few commas as necessary to achieve clarity.
For some good examples of where NOT to put commas, check out my blog post Don’t Put a Comma in your Ear. For some examples of where commas are necessary, this archived post from Purdue University is handy to peruse when self-editing: Extended Rules for Using Commas.
One regular error is the comma splice, which is also known as a run-on sentence. It occurs when a comma is incorrectly used to join two independent clauses in place of a coordinating conjunction (for, and, nor, but, or, yet, or so) or in place of an appropriate punctuation mark (such as a semi-colon, colon, or em dash).
An example is:
He ran to the bus, it was running late.
Because both of these clauses constitute short sentences — that is, they both have a subject (a noun or pronoun, in this case he and it) and a predicate (a verb form, in this case ran and running) — this is incorrect. This sentence could be correctly written as:
- He ran to the bus. It was running late.
- He ran to the bus; it was running late.
- He ran to the bus: it was running late.
- He ran to the bus — it was running late.
- He ran to the bus, which was running late. (Perhaps best of all.)
Any one of these is better than the original splice, although the first, second and last are the most standard.

Poor comma usage can also lead to another editorial bugbear: the misplaced modifier. Modifiers are usually adverbial or participial phrases that cause problems when they unintentionally modify something other than what the writer intended.
Groucho Marx once quipped:
“One morning I shot an elephant in my pajamas. How he got into my pajamas I’ll never know.”
The problem with Marx’s joke (or at least part of the problem!) is that the modifying phrase (in my pajamas) is positioned close to the object of this sentence (elephant) rather than to the subject (I), which is what it should be modifying. To make it correct, it would require recasting:
One morning, while/whilst still in my pajamas, I shot an elephant.
[I say while/whilst because it depends on which side of that debate you squat on. Old school is to use whilst; new school would be to go with while, which is now commonly used in both British and American English.]
Participial verb forms regularly create an insidious type of misplaced modifier known as a “dangling participle.” Participle verbs are -ing form verbs, e.g. Running, smiling, dancing, glancing.
When a subject does not immediately follow a participle phrase at the start of a sentence, a dangling participle can occur. Take, for instance:
Glancing up at the clock, the photograph on the mantelpiece caught my eye.
The subject in this sentence is unintentionally the photograph, which is accidentally performing both of the actions — glancing and “catching” (in “caught”, the past participle of catch). To make this sentence correct, it would need to be reworded:
As I glanced up at the clock, the photograph on the mantelpiece caught my eye.
Or:
Glancing up at the clock, I noticed the photograph on the mantelpiece.
You could also rewrite it as:
Glancing up at the clock, my eye was caught by the photograph on the mantelpiece.
But that sounds awkward because even though the subject is now “my eye” the photograph is still performing the action of the verb “caught.”
You might also try:
Glancing up at the clock, my eyes were drawn to the photograph on the mantelpiece.
Or even just:
I glanced up at the clock, but my eyes were drawn to the photograph on the mantelpiece.
The good thing about misplaced modifiers and dangling participles is that, once you have identified them, there are several easy fixes when self-editing. Spotting them in the first place is usually the tricky part! For more on misplaced modifiers, visit this page.
Some adverbs also need careful consideration when it comes to their role as modifiers. Mostly, adverbs are freewheeling. They are the only words that can move around a sentence without throwing too much into disarray. Take:
- The cat climbed quickly up the wall.
- Quickly, the cat climbed up the wall.
- The cat climbed up the wall quickly.
- The cat quickly climbed up the wall.
We’ve no issues there; they all make perfect sense, although some are slightly more euphonious. But some adverbs “limit” or constrain the words they are close to. An example is the adverb “only,” which should be placed just before the word it modifies. For example:
Go to school only if you are well.
Not:
Only go to school if you are well
The latter implies that if you are well, you should do nothing else but go to school.

Dialogue and action scenes are the make-or-break elements of any story. Writing evocative prose is great, but without action and dialogue to drive the plot forward and make the reader feel invested in your tale (and your characters) all you will have is pretty words on a page.
Get dialogue right, and your characters’ voices will ring in your readers’ heads; get it wrong, and your characters will seem flat and, frankly, fictional.
All too often new authors get it wrong.
There are a lot of ways to go wrong when it comes to dialogue. The first is to hardly include any at all! Without dialogue you will likely have an awful lot of “telling” and very little “showing.” I often see narrative passages that tell me how the characters have been interacting.
For example:
When Joe called Nathan into the conference room and told him that Wordsmith Industries could no longer afford to keep him on, Nathan, understandably upset, called him a bastard. Nathan had worked for Joe for fifteen years and angrily told his boss that the company had taken the best years of his life in exchange for a meagre wage and minimum superannuation contributions. Joe, affronted by his employee’s response, immediately told him to get out. As a final indignity, he gestured to Nathan’s uniform and explained that he would need that back, too: it belonged to the company. Nathan stripped off and tossed the clothes on the floor, then called Joe a bastard again, and a coward.
In rare cases, a few brief sentences of this type of exposition can summarize an earlier, “off-screen” conversation (especially if you already have a lot of dialogue, or if it would make for a short, choppy scene). However, it is usually far more interesting to show the reader using dialogue and action, even if it requires more words. Keep this in mind when self-editing your work.
“Have a seat.” Joe gestured towards the conference table.
Nathan, looking worried, took the seat closest to the door.
“I’m afraid it is bad news,” Joe said, sitting at the opposite end of the table. “As you know, Wordsmith Industries has had some financial difficulties this year.” He cleared his throat and smoothed down his greasy comb-over. “You see, we’re going to have to let you go.”
“You bastard! I’ve given fifteen years to this company — fifteen of my best working years — and all for what? A meagre wage and minimum superannuation contributions?”
Affronted, Joe stood. “I was going to suggest you stay on a week to clear things up. But if that’s how you feel, I think you should just get out. Now!” He pointed a trembling index finger toward the door.
Nathan raked the chair back from the table and leaped to his feet.
“One more thing.” Joe pointed to the uniform Nathan wore. “You’ll need to leave that here: it’s company property.”
Scowling, Nathan dropped his trousers and wrenched off his shirt. A button pinged off the conference table, hitting the wall just below the framed print of a mountain peak with the word “Courage” printed underneath. “You really are a bastard!” Nathan spat. “And a coward.” Then he turned and strode out.
(This second example is longer but note that this actually tells us a lot more about both characters than the original “telling” narrative did.)

### Expository dialogue
Another dialogue no-no is expository dialogue and you must watch out for it when self-editing. Expository dialogue uses the characters as mouthpieces to relay essential elements of the plot, or information about other characters, which the author wants the reader to know but didn’t want to write as exposition. Let’s use Joe and his wife Gloria as an example.
“Joe, you know that our company Wordsmith Industries is in financial trouble and if we don’t get rid of some employees we’re not going to be able to make the repayment this month and the bank will foreclose on us,” Gloria said as she filled the sink with hot water and squirted in a stream of detergent. “I think you should sack Nathan.”
“Yes, my wife,” Joe answered, “but it’s only because of my gambling problem. If I hadn’t bet that ten grand on that stupid horse named Expository Dialogue we wouldn’t be in this mess.”
“Exactly!” Gloria pulled on rubber gloves and began scrubbing furiously at a saucepan. “And your brother Tim, who lives in London and has four children, should never have asked you for that loan to add on another bedroom. Now look where it has got us.” She pushed a frizzy curl out of her face and huffed in consternation.
Joe sighed.
“And tell Nathan that he needs to leave his green and white uniform, because we paid for it and had it embroidered with the company slogan “We do it better” in yellow cotton thread last year when we sent it out to Carol Bigby’s seamstress services in Castlemaine.”
Of course, there are other issues with this passage, including wordiness and Gloria’s tendency to divulge inconsequential information. But my point is that there is no need for Gloria to tell Joe things he already knows, such as that their business is in trouble (he would know that), or that his brother lives in London and has four kids (he would know that also).
There is no need for her to tell him that the uniform is green and white and embroidered with the company slogan in yellow cotton. There is even no need for Joe to use “my wife” in talking to Gloria, or to tell her about his gambling problem — no doubt poor Gloria already knows about that, too.
What is happening here is that the author thinks she is cleverly slipping in description or backstory without passages of exposition. However, this is equally as expository, and it reeks of authorial interference. It also makes the characters seem contrived and the dialogue seem pointless.
For more about expository characters, check out this page on TV Tropes, but I warn you in advance that clicking on links can result in you being trapped in this very addictive site for hours on end!

### Um, err, how’s the weather?
Sometimes, writers do their dialogue a disservice by trying to be too realistic. Wait! Did you say “too realistic”? Why wouldn’t we want our dialogue to be realistic? I can imagine some of you thinking.
The answer is that you do want a level of realism. But rather than making dialogue slavishly realistic by adding all of the ifs, ums, wells, buts, hellos, how are yous and trivial social pleasantries that pepper real conversation, the aim is to create an illusion of realism.
In real life, we chat about the weather, or work, or how we’re doing, before launching into the nitty gritty of a conversation, but in a book, all of that is filler. Omit filler wherever possible; your readers will thank you for it. They won’t sit there thinking, Gee it was rude that Cassandra didn’t ask Ben how his weekend was first thing on a Monday morning before she blurted out that Sarah was having an affair; at least, they won’t if you “hook” them on your story by writing gripping, authentic dialogue and making your characters credible.

### Throw the “said book” at them
One of the biggest problems with adverbs is that they can hinder dialogue, especially if used a lot. I’m all for adverbs in moderation, or where they add meaning while keeping writing concise. But try to avoid using adverbs after every dialogue tag.
“Said Bookisms” can also make for amateurish dialogue. Some editors and authors insist that writers should only ever use “said” when attributing dialogue; I don’t. However, I do suggest removing extraneous tags and attributions when self-editing.
If you feel the need to use growled, whispered, screamed, goaded, taunted, muttered, or mumbled on occasion, I say go right ahead, but remember that less is more. If your character is mumbling, muttering, shouting, exclaiming, querying or propounding all of the time, chances are he or she is not distinct or dimensional enough.
When you have just two people involved in a conversation, you can usually get away with just letting them speak, using only their actions to remind the reader which character is speaking.
“What are you doing?” Cassandra leaned over Ben for a closer look.
“Deactivating the power source.” Ben flipped the switch on the control panel and slipped the back off the unit.
“Why?”
“Why do you think?” He frowned as he poked a screwdriver into the mass of electrical wires.
“I hope you disconnected it from the grid first.”
“From the grid? Now why would I want to do that?” Ben said sarcastically.
If you have a lot of characters involved in a conversation, I’d recommend using actions or “said” in at least 75% of cases, but using other appropriate tags when — and only when — they add meaning and make sense. Also, do avoid some of the more inane Said Bookisms, e.g.
“What are you doing?” he ejaculated.
“I hope you disconnected it from the grid first,” she snorted.
“Let’s go,” she propositioned.

### Name dropping
There is rarely a need to have your characters use other characters’ names in dialogue, but authors often do this purely to remind the reader who is speaking to whom.
In conversation, especially in person, we rarely use each other’s names (although we might in some cases, such as if we are angry, emotional or frustrated).
When characters are on the telephone, addressing each other by name, at least to begin with, is standard, but when you are self-editing remember that using names constantly in face-to-face dialogue is distracting for the reader and unrealistic.

### All of the above!
An example of some flawed dialogue that incorporates all of these no-nos might be:
“What are you doing, Ben?” Cassandra queried curiously, leaning over Ben for a closer look.
“I’m deactivating the power source, Cassandra,” Ben expounded patiently.
“Why, Ben?” Cassandra questioned.
“Why do you think, Cassandra,” Ben grimaced, as he poked a screwdriver into the mass of electrical wires. “If I don’t, it might go off and blow us all to smithereens. But it’s okay. You and I both know I’ve done this before during the Gulf War, although I am colour blind.”
“Ben, I hope you disconnected it from the grid first,” said Cassandra patronisingly.
“From the grid, Cassandra?” Ben ejaculated forcefully. [Yes, I know! Bad, huh?]
See how artificial and stilted this dialogue has become? There is way too much padding around it, which bogs the reader down. If you recognise some of this padding in your dialogue, it is time to revise.
For action sequences or fast-paced sections of your tale, try to streamline your dialogue as much as possible, keeping tags, attributions and actions to a minimum.
Writing edgy, minimalist dialogue in small chunks — with brief descriptive or action elements in between to avoid dialogue going on for pages without referencing the setting (which is known as writing “talking heads”) — will pick up the pace and keep your readers invested in the action.

## Whoops, wrong word
It is very easy to overlook a homonym used incorrectly when self-editing or even a word that is similar to another but has a different meaning. Some of the most common mix-ups I encounter are:
- Adverse (hostile or unfavorable) Averse (reluctant)
- Affect (verb: to influence) Effect (mostly used as a noun, meaning a result or consequence, e.g. a side effect or a special effect. When used as a verb, it means to result in, e.g. to effect an escape.)
- A lot (many or often) Alot (no such word!)
- Allusion (an indirect reference) Illusion (a false impression or perception of reality)
- Altogether (total) All together (many things close together)
- Assure (promise) Ensure (make certain) Insure (take out an insurance premium on)
- Breath (noun: inhalation or exhalation) Breathe (verb: the act of inhaling or exhaling)
- Continual (recurring constantly) Continuous (never-ending or unceasing)
- Dam (a manmade body of water) Damn (profanity)
- Discrete (separate/distinct) Discreet (tactful or modest)
- Every day (every day) Everyday (adjective: occurring every day or mundane, e.g. everyday clothes)
- Fewer (refers to individual objects that can be counted) Less (refers to quantities, e.g.  Fewer people will mean less mess)
- Imply (to signify, an action performed by a speaker or writer) Infer (to reason or conclude, an action performed by the listener or reader)
- Its (pronoun: belonging to it) It’s (contraction of it is)
- Lay (to place something somewhere) Lie (to recline or to fib)
- Libel (written form of defamation) Liable (obligated)
- Literally (100% true) Figuratively (involving a figure of speech such as a metaphor)
- Loath (reluctant) Loathe (detest)
- Loose (adjective or adverb: not tight) Lose (verb: misplace) I see this one used incorrectly a lot!
- Stationary (adjective: not moving, still) Stationery (noun: writing paper)
- Their (pronoun: belonging to them) They’re (contraction of they are) There (adverb: location)
- On to (e.g. before I move on to the next point) Onto (preposition: we climbed onto the table)
- Passed (past tense verb of pass: to have moved) Past (adjective: relating to a former time or place)
- Principle (belief) Principal (adjective: most important; noun, authoritative person)
- That (for defining clauses, e.g. words that cannot be omitted in a sentence) Which (for non-defining clauses that provide additional information)
- Who (subject of a sentence, e.g. The boy who lived) Whom (object of a sentence, e.g. To whom should I direct my enquiry?)
- Whose (interrogative pronoun, e.g. Whose book is that?) Who’s (contraction of who is)
For a more complete list, check out Alan Cooper’s list.
As I mentioned in Part I, these are basic errors and are easily fixed. Issues with plot, plausibility, pacing, and characterisation are more time-consuming to correct.
I hope you have found my guest posts useful as a quick introduction to some of the errors to watch out for when you self-edit. Going through your manuscript several times to check each of these things in isolation will help, as will reading your work aloud, using text-to-speech to listen to the computer read it back to you, reading passages backwards, and deconstructing sentences that sound a little “off” to your ear.

## About Karin Cox
Karin Cox is an Australian editor, poet and author and, like many women, is doing her best to be a modern Wonder Woman (minus the cape and the gold lasso). Trained as a professional editor, and with more than fourteen years in the trade publishing industry under her belt, she edits and writes in her “spare time” while being a fulltime mum to her infant daughter and to a black cat with the improbable name of “Ping Pong.”

## Final note from Dave on self-editing:
A big thank you to Karin Cox for this comprehensive post. If you are interested in hiring Karin to edit your own book, you can check out her editor site here.
And if you are interested in checking out her written work, she has self-published several books, including the paranormal fantasy Dark Guardians series, and you can check out the first book on Amazon here. Karin also has 50+ traditionally published titles, and you can get more details on those on her site.
As for me, there’s not much I can add to such a comprehensive post, and I hope you all learned more about how to edit a book.
Don’t forget to check out my post on the editorial process, which will explain where self-editing fits in overall, along with beta readers, story editing (aka developmental or content editing), copy editing, and proofing.
Out of all the things Karin covered above — apart from loath/loathe which I can never get to stick plus a worrying tendency towards unintended double entendres which I always seem to slip in (oops) — I think the most common error I make from the above is “talking heads” dialogue.
I’m generally averse to overly florid writing, and have quite a spare style myself, but I can often go too far in the first draft and each successive draft then needs a little more setting and detail to be layered in when self-editing.
I write dialogue much quicker than narrative, and, as I have the whole scene pictured in my head, I rarely notice when I fail to include the necessary minimum of detail/setting to “anchor” the conversation for the reader. Of course, I usually catch that myself when self-editing but often too my editor’s red pen gets busy.
I’ve gotten a little better at self-editing over the years, and one resource that really helped me was Self-Editing For Fiction Writers by Renni Browne and Dave King; it’s excellent.
What about you? What’s your most common flub? Do you enjoy self-editing or is it a case of gritting your teeth and getting on with it?

--------------------------

Authors Say #DisneyMustPay
Posted by David Gaughran 29 January 2021. Bewares • 1 Comment.

Disney is accused of serial non-payment of royalties to Star Wars author Alan Dean Foster – in a move that could ultimately affect all published writers, prompting widespread calls that #DisneyMustPay.
Foster wrote the first ever Star Wars novelization, released six months before that initial movie. Star Wars: From the Adventures of Luke Skywalker was based on a screenplay written by George Lucas and its his name that graced the front cover. But Alan Dean Foster wrote the book, which is still in print, and he received royalty checks for it right up until the point that Disney acquired Lucasfilm. Then the checks stopped coming.
Back in the 1970s, Foster was contracted to write a sequel to that first tie-in, working from far less material this time. George Lucas wasn’t entirely sure at that point how successful Star Wars would be and, crucially, how much of a budget he would have to play with for the sequel – which placed limitations on the kind of follow-up story Foster could write. For example, Lucas instructed Foster to keep Han Solo out of the story, because Harrison Ford had not signed on for that sequel yet.
Further writers were hired as successive Star Wars movies were released, and the franchise grew in popularity and scope, while Alan Dean Foster moved on to other projects. He worked on numerous media tie-ins for other valuable franchises like Star Trek, Alien, Transformers, Alien Nation, and Terminator, a whole plethora of standalone novelizations for movies like Krull, The Thing, Clash of the Titans, and The Last Starfighter, and also his own original novels like the Spellsinger series and the many Humanx Commonwealth books. More recently, he returned to the Star Wars universe to write the novelization of The Force Awakens.
In other words, this isn’t some unknown or inexperienced author that Disney is pushing around. But what is Disney playing at?

## All Your IP Belong To Us
Disney has always been a mainstay of American life, but in the last decade or so it has swollen to epic proportions, gobbling up all sorts of popular properties and pushing its market capitalization to incredible heights: latest figures value the company at over $250bn – a valuation being propelled by staggering revenue figures, projected at around $65bn for 2020 alone.
In recent years, Disney has purchased Marvel Studios, along with all its notable IPs; Lucasfilm, home to those Star Wars movies; Pixar; and then various properties from Fox as well. Other subsidiaries you may have heard of include Searchlight, ABC Television, National Geographic, and FX Networks.
Disney owns many of the most-loved media properties in America. And now it is alleged to be using corporate trickery to try and cheat an author out of the royalties he is contractually owed.
It seems that Disney has decided that when it purchased Lucasfilm, it acquired the assets but not its liabilities. To put a finer point on it, Disney seems to be saying that when it acquired the rights to Alan Dean Foster’s work it did not acquire the contractual obligation to pay royalties for the work. To make matters worse, Disney appears to be taking the same approach to the royalties from the Alien books, which it also owes Foster after acquiring 20th Century Fox last year. In both cases, Foster says that the royalty checks stopped coming as soon as Disney took over.
To make matters worse, according to Foster, Disney is refusing to meaningfully engage on the topic, using a common tactic of corporate bullies – i.e. Disney is just ignoring Foster and its legal obligations to pay him. Disney even told Foster that it won’t discuss the matter unless he signs a NDA before negotiations even commence. Which is a really dirty trick.
And as writer and activist Cory Doctorow notes in this Twitter thread, which you can find on the #DisneyMustPay hashtag along with lots more reaction from authors:
…aside from the individual injustice being visited upon Foster, Kowal and SFWA worry that this represents a suite of new, corporate anti-writer tactics: flipping assets without liabilities, refusing to talk about it without an NDA.
Doctorow also notes that these missing royalty checks are particularly needed by Foster right now as his wife is battling cancer. Something which presumably doesn’t fit with Disney’s supposed family friendly image.
Needless to say, all this has brought a fierce response from the author community, and one of the primary writers’ organizations.

## The Response: #DisneyMustPay
The Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers Association (SFWA) teamed up with Alan Dean Foster to hold a press conference on Thursday to lay out the accusations against Disney, who they say has failed to pay royalties for years, and refused to meaningfully engage with Foster, his representatives or the SFWA.
The reaction from authors has been fierce, with many rightly worried that other publishers could use this precedent to stop paying contractually owed royalties to pretty much any author, if Disney gets away with this. Between the press conference, a significant social media response centering around the #DisneyMustPay hashtag, and the support of many authors with large platforms, there has been considerable media coverage of the issue already, but the danger is that Disney will just try and wait it out.
These worries about setting a precedent aren’t misplaced either. Romance authors in particular will remember how Harlequin attempted to cheat a large number of writers out of contractually owed ebook royalties by creating subsidiaries and moving contracts around between shell companies – which was just a few years ago. And a battle which took an incredible amount of resolve to win, after numerous setbacks and some shady moves by Harlequin.
The author community needs to be equally resolute in standing up to Disney and demanding it honors the contracts it is responsible for. Perhaps Disney might consider dipping into one of those Scrooge McDuck-sized piles of cash it has laying around.

--------------------------

How To Market A Book | 2020 Edition
Posted by David Gaughran 29 January 2021. Marketing, Resources • 11 Comments.

Figuring out how to market a book in 2020 means grappling with a pair of imposing challenges: the multiplying complexity of book marketing and — speaking of things rising exponentially — the global pandemic, which has led to lockdowns, recessions, as well as no small amount of tragedy.
And I want to focus on that second challenge for a moment — before we dive into how to sell books specifically — because there is something rather different about this year.
Writers are generally quite fortunate in that they can work from home and sell books online and, for the moment at least, the digital side of the publishing business looks less exposed than the physical end.
Indeed, retailers and distributors are reporting a boost in ebook sales, and freebies in particular seem especially popular. Anecdotal reports concur, and also seem to confirm that there has been a surge in new entrants to the ebook market — which makes sense when people are stuck at home or less inclined to go browsing in meatspace, for painfully obvious reasons.
It feels weird to use the word “opportunity” when so many people are sick or dying, or otherwise facing financial difficulties or mental health challenges. This is not an easy topic to discuss and it is important to be sensitive to people who are dealing with… a lot.
But I also want to reassure authors that the book economy hasn’t collapsed, readers need escapism more than ever, and there might well be some increased, errr, opportunity to rack up sales. And perhaps salt away some money for whatever is coming at us.
Books are somewhat recession-proof — certainly at the price self-publishers sell them at — but there’s no telling how this pandemic will play out, or how prolonged the economic downturn will be.
Or if publishing will face any other curve balls, like anti-trust hearings into tech giants (who increasingly run the book business) — something that would cause much more uncertainty for the digital end of publishing, flipping the script of disruption for once.
It’s also worth pointing out that the pandemic has led to many companies turtling up. One of the quickest and easiest things to cut from budgets is online advertising as that is one place you can stop the bleeding instantly, unlike disentangling yourself from employment contracts or building leases or supplier arrangements.
Digital marketing agencies noticed an immediate and pronounced drop in ad spend across the board in March — not just in the hardest hit sectors such as tourism and hospitality — something that has continued as big brands especially batten down the hatches.
And while we are watching a horde of pigs take to the sky here in terms of ad costs dropping for once, those same agencies report that online traffic is up, of course, along with clickthrough rates and conversion and engagement levels.
Drawing all of this together, there are more (digital) readers than ever before, lots of them are new entrants to the market — meaning they have new devices to fill and are beating the bushes for cheap content — the uptake on freebies is higher than normal, and it’s cheaper to advertise than usual. Spoiling this view, though, are those storm clouds on the horizon.
Pick whatever bones you like out of that, but all this clearly says to me that now is the time to be proactive rather than passive. Now is the time to be running free promotions (and price promotions), dangling enticing and exclusive freebies to get people onto your list, but also making sure your email game is on point so that you retain as many customers as possible throughout this period of uncertainty that could drag on quite a while.
At least that’s my take. When I saw all this unfolding earlier in the year, I decided to double down on email and be a little more price aggressive generally.

What does that mean in real terms? Across my fiction and non-fiction I rebuilt my funnels to make them frictionless. I also added some pretty valuable products and made them completely free to really boost sign-ups, and the effect has been pronounced.
In case anyone is hanging a question mark on this, let me stress that these are readers happy to pay for books too, judging by my last launch; the new sign-ups who came in through all these spruced up free funnels are looking very strong in terms of opens, clicks, and purchases.
You don’t necessarily need to be as aggressive as I have been. I’m making some big bets here. I built an entire course and made it free — something that took a considerable amount of time to put together. It also costs money to host a course, and all that time spent building it and recording videos could have been spent writing a book, I’m sure you are thinking.
So it’s a gamble, especially because I decided to give it away for free, when there was potentially significant income to be made from selling it too. But it’s a gamble which might well pay off quite handsomely as 6,500 authors enrolled in the first few months and it has significantly boosted my mailing list with very high quality sign-ups.
And being able to do something cool for people right now is a buzz. I’m not going to pretend my motives are 100% altruistic, but if there’s a way I can make something accessible to everyone and help a lot of people and help myself too, then I’m down.
All this mailing list growth has a real effect on the bottom line. My last release shifted over 3,000 copies in the first few days before I even rolled out my first ad, and the investment in email marketing and content marketing means I haven’t really pushed that hard with ads at all.
Ads get all the attention these days but there are many ways to reach readers. I love ads! They are a really important part of my toolkit. But there are all sorts of ways that you can run your author business; you have options if you don’t have the budget for ads, or if they don’t work for you (or your particular niche). Or if you just want to explore other paths to readers so you are less dependent on one means of reaching them.
Survey the landscape, explore all the options, and pick what works from you out of this list. Here’s a whole bunch of book marketing tips to help you sell more books in 2020.
*drops mic*
*picks mic back up again*

Call them deal sites, reader sites, ad sites, promo sites, it doesn’t matter. They’ve been around since before I started publishing in 2011 and have gotten slicker every year since.
Deal sites are sometimes overlooked by authors who go for the flashier ad platforms, but as anyone who has taken my free course Starting From Zero will know, I make deal sites the foundation of any price promotion or free promotion that I run — even those at huge scale with significant spends on Facebook and Bookbub.
The reason for that is simple: these are the cheapest clicks going and give you a great basis to build on for any launch or backlist promotion. Booking a hand-picked selection of deal sites is the very first thing I do when lining up all my pieces for a big launch or when I want to goose a backlist book, or move a whole series at once. We’ve seen some interesting innovations on that latter front recently.
I have a curated selection of recommended book promo sites, which is both kept up to date and broken down into various categories — freebies, discounts, series promos, genre specialists, and so on. I even have a list of the best sites for those on a restricted budget, as well as listing several sites which I only use for the biggest, most aggressive pushes. For best results, you really need to stack your promos. And if you want to learn how to do that, my course Starting From Zero will walk you through every step.
Of course, the biggest deal site of all is BookBub, where the Featured Deals promos can rack up more sales than all the other sites combined – many times over, in fact.
A BookBub Featured Deal is the closest we have to a sure thing in the book marketing world, generating thousands of sales and instant bestseller status and often quite a bit of profit too. However, getting picked can be a challenge — especially for less established authors (or those exclusive to Amazon, regardless of how many millions of books they sell).
Luckily, there’s another way to reach that audience.

I think BookBub Ads deserve a little more love than they get from authors. It’s my favorite advertising platform, and the very best one for wide authors as no one else can reach those small pockets of non-Amazon readers scattered around the world with such ease, and those little income streams are crucial for wide authors eschewing the mighty… I’m not going to do it. The pun is right there, I can almost taste it, but I’m not going to do it.
Anyway, the unparalleled responsiveness of the platform also make it the very best choice for Kindle Unlimited authors looking to really blow a Countdown promo out of the water, in my opinion. I definitely don’t buy into the idea that BookBub Ads don’t work for Amazon-exclusive authors! That’s crazy talk.
I’ve run giant campaigns generating millions and million of page reads and garnering multiple All-Star awards where BookBub Ads were probably driving around half the action in advertising terms — even though the audiences are so much bigger at Facebook and Amazon.
I wrote the book on BookBub Ads — literally. And I’ve just given that book a quick update so that it covers the couple of small changes that were made to the platform since I released it last year.
It also comes with a pretty amazing set of bonus resources (housed on a private part of this site), such as a gallery of winning ad images, and detailed optimization advice.
And it’s available at a reduced price until the end of the week, so now is the time to grab it.
Moving on to other resources for you, I realize now that might have to change that marketing line because USA Today bestselling author Nick Thacker has released his own book on BookBub, the rascal.
I haven’t read BookBub Mastery yet, but it’s on my Kindle, although I understand it encompasses the whole platform, including Featured Deals and the like, rather than just focusing on ads.
Now that I’ve finished a long stretch of publishing new books for authors, I can catch up on what everyone else has been writing!
BookBub Mastery is here if you want to check it out – Nick Thacker is a very savvy author, so I’m sure it has lots of useful takeaways.
Resources I have actually read and can recommend in more detail mostly come from BookBub themselves, who have a pretty great blog (itself a stellar example of content marketing — take note, fellow non-fiction authors).
Aside from writing posts themselves and drawing back the curtain so we can regale the glorious innards of BookBub Inc., they also regularly feature some pretty great guest posts from authors doing all sorts of interesting things with BookBub Ads, and the platform generally, for example this post from regular New York Times & USA Today bestseller Cheryl Bradshaw.
Just always keep in mind that BookBub is a deals site. I’m not saying it’s impossible to sell full priced books there, but you will be swimming against the tide.
I prefer to lean into the strengths of a platform, and BookBub is supremely good at moving freebies and discounts at volume. Indeed, a blog post released just today from BookBub’s Carlyn Robertson analyzes 1,000 recent BookBub Ads campaigns showing just how much price affects CTR and conversion.
There’s a ton of info out there on BookBub Ads now, even if you don’t want to put your hand in your pocket and/or commit to reading an entire book on the topic. It’s a community of over ten million passionate readers, so I strongly recommend finding some way of making that work for you.
Here’s one last resource to tempt: a video guide to creating your first BookBub Ads, featuring yours truly. Warning: contains Peak Lockdown face-hedge.

I am no expert here. At all. I won’t detail my frustrations but suffice to say I’ve never really cracked Amazon Ads. I can get them working at a lower level. Scaling those promising ads into something that delivers meaningful sales is something I can only do temporarily, it seems, and then the wheels come off. Sometimes spectacularly!
The best resource I’ve read to date is Robert Ryan’s Amazon Ads Unleashed, which was clear and concise and helped me understand the system a lot better. I’m going to take some time out soon and really have another proper crack at Amazon Ads, and try to follow his method to the letter, rather than doing my usual piecemeal-type approach, and I expect performance to improve a couple of notches at least.
(Robert Ryan also has some guides to writing sales copy and blurbs which are on my list to check out – just FYI.)
Another highly rated guide is Deb Potter’s Amazon Ads For Authors which I’ll also be reading as I really try to get to grips with Amazon Ads.
Lots of authors who know their stuff have been recommending this one quite passionately — and I’ve been meaning to read it for a while, but I can’t read non-fiction while writing it! Looking forward to diving into this one.
While I have more than enough reader eyeballs to be chasing on Facebook and BookBub — with ads I already know how to wrangle — Amazon Ads does have some rather unique strengths, despite my personal frustrations (and shortcomings).
Amazon Ads are the best tool for the job when it comes to nailing down Also Boughts, for example. The platform is arguably the least price sensitive of the three main places to advertise. And then while Amazon Ads might seem sluggish compared to the responsiveness of BookBub Ads, and thus less suitable perhaps for really turning up the juice on a limited-time promo like a launch or a Countdown Deal, they are eminently suited to providing a solid baseline of sales so that any hard-won Amazon visibility doesn’t slip away so easily.
A gold-plated safety-net, if you like.
One mistake that we all make at some point, though, is trying to solve all our problems by just throwing traffic at our books. But often the problem — and the solution — is more fundamental.

## Book Marketing & Reader Targeting
Reader targeting isn’t just about lining your ads up and pointing them at the right people, although that helps of course. As Seth Godin says, “the best marketing is baked into the product.” If you look at the very biggest sellers, you will notice that everything is in harmony from the book title to the description to the cover to the branding to the ad graphics, and so on.
This handy primer on reader targeting will introduce you to the concept. But, in short, mega-sellers tend to have a very clear picture of their Ideal Reader, and design the whole product from the ground up to appeal to them. This is an approach we can take with our own books, both in terms of trying to get it right from the start, but also going back and fixing issues with our back catalog.
My book [Strangers to Superfans](https://davidgaughran.com/books/strangers-to-superfans-marketing-guide-the-reader-journey/) explores this idea in more depth, and maps out the often tortuous journey our Ideal Reader takes from being completely unaware of our work, to being its most passionate advocate. There are many roadblocks along the way, and Strangers to Superfans will teach you how to identify them, and remove them, so that The Reader Journey is optimized at every single stage.
Strangers to Superfans was recently given a rebrand, as you can see, along with a very quick update just to zap some of the out of date parts.
(There is a new paperback edition too, just FYI.)
Strangers to Superfans is also going to be paired with a pretty nifty set of bonus resources, as you might have seen already with Let’s Get Digital and BookBub Ads Expert (note: this should roll out over the weekend).
This is a really cool value-add I’m doing with all my non-fiction now — even my free reader magnet, Following.
Anyway, once you have followed the process in Strangers to Superfans, you can then turn up the juice and watch the readers pour in, with confidence that you are getting the most out of all those clicks you are paying so handsomely for.

## The Big Kahuna: Facebook Ads
The biggest platform of all, the most complex, and the most flexible. Daunting for beginners, but incredible upside for those who can master it.
Beginners: I have a pretty great 12-part introduction to Facebook Ads which you will get access to if you sign up to my mailing list. Devious, perhaps, but these are the breaks.
Advanced users: Jon Loomer is the best resource I’ve found, although keep in mind he’s a general marketer, not book-specific, so you will have to parse his advice accordingly.
For everyone: I’m going to be diving into the world of Facebook on my new YouTube channel soon, so make sure you subscribe to that.
Here’s a taster: a tutorial on how to make your own Facebook graphics (you can use this approach for BookBub also). No design skills needed!

Story time! As I’m sure you know, Amazon’s outsized money pot means it can acquire pretty much anyone it likes, but Jeff Bezos was intrigued by Zappos in particular because it was a “customer-obsessed company.”
As a pioneering online shoe retailer in the late 90s, Zappos realized that customer resistance to ordering online was the primary challenge, so it instituted a no-questions-asked returns policy with free shipping in both directions.
While this policy was open to be exploited — and was indeed abused by some customers — Zappos was betting that breaking down that entrenched customer resistance to ordering online made it worthwhile. This policy also had the rather important side-effect of keeping customers happy, not making loyal customers with genuine issues jump through hoops, and generated considerable word-of-mouth too.
What does this have to do with email marketing?
Well, smart businesses know that retaining customers is easier and cheaper than beating the bushes for new ones. Email marketing is the best tool for the job when it comes to keeping your reader engaged between releases, and building up your email list is the best thing you can do for your career, aside from writing more books.
A large list of happy and engaged email subscribers is the most powerful marketing tool available to you. It’s like having a BookBub in your pocket which you can drop any time you like. If you haven’t boarded the Email Train yet, and have not been won over to the idea of emailing readers regularly and proactively building up your list, then read this post on the power of email marketing.
Really though, the key resource when it comes to email is Tammi Labrecque’s Newsletter Ninja. Regular readers will have heard me say this a dozen times but I’ll say it again: it revolutionized my approach to email and I can’t recommend it highly enough.
While some people are passionate advocates for running Facebook Ads to build up their list, or doing lots of BookFunnel giveaways, or various other list-builders, I’m much happier building up my lists organically. Those are better quality sign-ups, with more sticking power and greater tendencies to do the rather important part of buying those books of yours.
As such, I prefer building up my mailing list by having an enticing reader magnet — one which is exclusive too — and making sure the call-to-action in my end matter is effective. I then use ads to increase book sales instead, letting that spill over into sign-ups. Not only does this put money in the bank while building up my list, the sign-ups are much better quality than those coming at you cold from somewhere like Facebook, or those who only really signed up to have a chance of winning a Kindle Fire, or whatever.
That said, I am a huge fan of BookSweeps list-builders promos (affiliate link), and I’ve used them a few times with great results. The sign-ups tend to be much higher quality than other such promos.
But to really get the most out of email marketing, you need to focus on more than getting sign-ups.
You should have a good welcome sequence in place. You can always improve your open rates. And you should a good chunk of any effort on this front into crafting emails people actually want to receive — make sure you put real and genuine value into every message.
And that’s value for them btw.
Treating your readers with respect, and remembering that there are real people behind each one of those email addresses is especially important with everything going on in the world right now. Keep that in mind when dealing with readers in general.

## Those Pesky Amazon Algorithms
The wizards behind the Kindle Store curtain are another matter. Cold, heartless brutes!
Some seem to view the Amazon algorithms as some kind of capricious deities who bestow favor on certain books and curses on others, but they are more like emotionless robots who follow very set paths.
Algorithms can be observed and understood, even it they are shielded and proprietary. And we can use this knowledge to position our books and tweak our marketing plans to increase the amount that Amazons recommends our books to readers.
I’ve just released a new book called Amazon Decoded which breaks down the Kindle Store and hands you some ready-made marketing plans so that you can profit from all your new knowledge.
(Also available in paperback, btw.)
Whether you are an exclusive author chasing those page reads, or a wide author (like myself) trying to survive the perma-onslaught of Kindle Unlimited titles, Amazon Decoded will help you get those algorithms working for you instead of against you.
No goat-slaughtering required.

## Hot And Fresh: Metadata Madness
Is there anything sexier than optimizing your metadata? I mean, aside from literally everything that has ever existed?
I cover the topic myself in some depth in Amazon Decoded so I know how hard it is to make interesting. Dave Chesson at Kindlepreneuer does a stellar job of covering keywords and categories in particular and his Publisher Rocket tool has some very passionate adherents.
Those are affiliate links so let me be clear about who I recommend this for, and who I don’t. Publisher Rocket costs $97 after all, which is not nothing. So if you are on a restricted budget, and are deciding between something like this, and booking an ad with Freebooksy, or getting higher quality cover for your next release, then book the promo/spring for the cover.
I’d personally classify Publisher Rocket as a nice-to-have, more than an essential, but if you have the budget I think it’s very nice to have, especially with the new features being added all the time.
Publisher Rocket is a great tool for generating keywords for your book and also for your Amazon Ads (just be careful to do some serious pruning afterwards as it will generate lots of irrelevant ones, which are death to an Amazon Ads campaign).
But it does more than that these days too: it has changed how I think about book titles, given me a deeper understanding of how real, flesh-and-blood Amazon customers actually use that search box, and is a rather handy way of snooping on the competition, finding new authors to target (and cross-promote with), seeing what categories others are in, and also where some rather lucrative opportunities might lie in terms of some under-served niches with higher volume searches.
I think non-fiction authors in particular will have their ears perking up right now, but there’s a lot there for fiction authors too. If you’re on the fence, then maybe take a look at the Publisher Rocket tutorial videos so you can actually see it in action – and see if it will be worth the $97 for you.
Also, there is a 30-day money back guarantee if you want to take it for a risk-free test drive.
For those who don’t have $97 to spare, I get you. You can replicate much of the work that Publisher Rocket does with a bit of shoe leather and patience. Dave Chesson has some great articles (above) on how you can follow this keyword generating method without using Publisher Rocket, and, really, you can learn a lot just from taking the time to do some keyword research, inputting those potentials into the Amazon search bar, seeing what terms the system suggests, and then combing through the results manually.

I like to tell myself a joke: a content marketer is a content marketer. Yeah. Sorry about that. It has been a slow… year.
Anyway, content marketing is more than just a buzzword and it’s something you already know how to do. Something that doesn’t involve ads, or even spending money, if you don’t want to. Yegads!
This post serves as a quick intro to content marketing. And it that tickles your tickly bits, then definitely sign up to my list and grab your free copy of Following which will teach you how to set up your author platform, and then how to use the principles of content marketing to both attract readers to that platform and, especially, how to retain your customers and keep them interested and engaged and happy, and also prime them to buy your next book.
Also check out Joanna Penn’s work on the topic – she’s an excellent content marketer and applies these principles to her fiction also. I particularly enjoyed this piece on content marketing for book promotion, and this breakdown on some of the theory behind content marketing best practices.
Dave Chesson is another good example of someone walking the content marketing walk, one who is particularly strong on the SEO aspect, which might be of interest to non-fiction authors in particular.
Content marketing should be a central plank for non-fiction authors, particularly those in niches where you can’t get a BookBub Featured Deal or run ads on ENT, or even get Facebook Ads to run without crazy CPCs, or get Amazon Ads to serve at all.
But fiction authors shouldn’t dismiss the power of content marketing. Newsletters are content marketing. Reader magnets are content marketing. (Yes, stories can be content marketing – see, you do know how to do it!) But you can also take these principles and apply them to your Facebook Page, and really grow engagement on that platform.
I get a lot of free, organic reach on Facebook – the kind that many seem to think has gone away – because I work hard to be very disciplined with my Facebook pages and keep the basic principles of content marketing front-and-center.
Well, I try. I’m not perfect at it, but I’m learning constantly and seeing better results all the time too. It’s a process, but it won’t begin until you actively start focusing on it.

## How To Market A Book: Strategy
“Sheesh. I thought this dude was going to make our life easier and all he’s done is dump a load of crap on our desks,” is what you might be thinking right now.
Yeah. About that…
You don’t need to do all this stuff — you might not even need to do much of it! Pick a couple of things and get good at those first. That will get you very far indeed.
I come from an advertising/marketing background and I’m still playing catch-up here. My Amazon Ads game is shoddy. My SEO could be a lot better. And there’s always more to learn about Facebook.
There’s more I could be doing on multiple fronts, but I’m happy taking it step-by-step and improving one thing at a time — while making sure I reserve time for creating new books and new content of all kinds to keep my business ticking over.
Don’t get overwhelmed. You don’t need to tackle everything at once. You can get pretty far with a solid email game and one optimized pathway to readers. So maybe focus on that to begin with. Specifically, pick one aspect of email marketing to improve, and one ad platform (or one aspect of content marketing) to work on, and then bolt on new skills as you need.
This is how I’ve built my career. This is how everyone does it. Never forget: everyone starts from zero.
And if you want a little more guidance on how you can do that too, remember, I have a whole course designed to help you do that. And it’s free.
“One last thing,” he says, finally looking up from his notes to see an empty auditorium…

--------------------------

Decoding Amazon To Sell More Books
Posted by David Gaughran 22 January 2022. Amazon • 3 Comments.

It’s here – Amazon Decoded: A Marketing Guide to the Kindle Store breaks down how the Kindle Store really works so that you you can sell more books.
There’s more detail below on exactly what the book covers – plus news of some very cool bonus resources that come with this book and an epic live stream coming soon. But first! Those purchase links:
Amazon | Apple | Kobo | Barnes & Noble | Google | Paperback
In case you read the old, free edition and want to know what has changed, let me make that easy for you: everything. This brand new edition is a full-length book (over 75,000 words) breaking down how the Kindle Store, and how you can seduce Amazon’s giant recommendation engine.
Most importantly, it goes deep on how to profit from that knowledge, showing you exactly how to tweak your metadata and marketing plans to sell more books.
In fact, Amazon Decoded goes one step further than that and hands you a series of strategies and tactics you can use right away – launch plans and backlist promotions to suit your needs if you are wide or exclusive to Amazon, or whether you are looking to maximize income, expand your audience, promote your work on a limited budget, or spend a little more and send a whole series into orbit.
Amazon Decoded also comes with a stellar set of bonus resources, housed on a private part of this here website, which will help you put all this information into practice and raise your marketing game.
Want to sell more books on the world’s biggest retailer? Amazon Decoded will show you how.
Amazon | Apple | Kobo | Barnes & Noble | Google | Paperback

## Decoding Amazon – Sell More Books – LIVE
Come and join my stream next Friday where I’ll be breaking down how Amazon works LIVE on YouTube and Facebook.
I’ll be simulcasting to both platforms, which is a thing I do in 2020 apparently – while answering all your questions and sharing screens and maybe even drinking beer. What could possibly go wrong? I recommend clicking one of the links below to get a reminder just before I go live – and so you can watch a replay afterwards too.
Pencil it into your diaries: August 14, at 1pm EST/6pm GMT. It will run for an hour.

#### Get Notified on YouTube
Go here and hit that Subscribe button and YouTube will ping you when I go on air.

#### Get Notified on Facebook
Head over to Facebook and hit that INTERESTED button like it owes you money, and Zuck’s bots will insert a handy reminder into your feed at the appropriate juncture, like some kind of cyber-butler.
That’s it, see you on Friday!

--------------------------

What The Big Tech Hearings Mean For Indie Authors
Posted by David Gaughran 6 April 2021. Amazon, Publishing • 8 Comments.

The CEOs of Big Tech – Facebook, Google, Amazon, and Apple – were grilled during hearings on Capitol Hill yesterday, stepping up the anti-trust chatter that has been percolating for the last few years. While some of you might be tempted to reflexively dismiss these hearings as political theater, many commentators seem to agree that this time feels different.
(Disclosure: I used to work for Google many moons ago.)
Political sands have shifted. Public sentiment towards tech companies has soured — companies who were once almost universally loved. Well, at least in the case of three of them; Amazon always attracted some measure of criticism, I guess, probably given the particular companies it disrupted.
Self-publishers perked up at the news of these hearings, given that three of those places are where we sell most of our books, and the fourth is what many of us predominantly use to drive sales of those books.
Whatever your personal feelings on these individual companies, their effects on society, or the forces driving these hearings (please: no politics in the comments), the mere prospect of anti-trust actions creates uncertainty in business terms, at a time when we already have a significant amount of it. Which makes this an excellent time to examine how well your author business is future-proofed, given the average indie author’s dependency on this set of companies currently in the anti-trust spotlight.

No doubt many of those self-publishing will use moments like this to talk up the benefits of being truly independent and selling direct and cutting ties with the likes of Amazon and Apple completely. I personally prefer taking a more pragmatic approach, using these companies on my own terms, while always trying to move my customer relationships closer to home, and build my audience on land that I control.
I will happily use Google to drive traffic to my website, where I will use various content marketing techniques to both sell books and increase my mailing list. I have no problem using Facebook (or spending money on Facebook Ads) to increase website visits, boost book sales, and expand my mailing list further. I will take any opportunity I can to tap into the considerable global customer base at Apple and try to bring as many of those readers over to my website and my mailing list. And I always jump at the chance to grab any visibility going on Amazon which has the biggest audience of all when it comes to selling books, of course.
But even on Amazon, I’m not spending any effort increasing something like Amazon Follows, because I want people on a list that I control, not one that Amazon controls. And Amazon really does control this platform tightly, ceding very little of that power to me.
Amazon doesn’t share any form of user data with me, or let me communicate with those following me either. Which is a problem as Amazon doesn’t even bother notifying my followers when I have a book out, except in the most ineffectual way imaginable. Amazon doesn’t even tell me how many people follow me on Amazon — which is so reflexively secretive that it actually makes me chuckle.
Hey, it doesn’t take much these days.
The illusion of control is stronger somewhere like Facebook. It feels like you control your Page — you have a say in how it looks, and can communicate with those following you on the platform… with certain restrictions, of course, and you can never guarantee everyone sees an important message, even after paying handsomely for the privilege. But Facebook shares a lot more user data, and it feels like more of a partnership.
That is an illusion, of course. Facebook can pull the rug out from under you at any time, as many authors have found out when a rogue AI decided to ban them from advertising, or even shut down their Page completely, without ever giving a reason why, or allowing them to mount a proper appeal.
And that ultimate lack of control is laid bare when you realize that you can’t export your list of followers and take them with you anywhere else, in case you want to get ahead of any trouble, or quit the platform for whatever reason. So, while I will build a platform on Facebook, because of the sheer size of their audience and the power of that advertising network, my ultimate aim is to move that customer relationship to somewhere I have the level of control that I need.
None of the tech companies — whether that’s Google or Apple or Amazon or Facebook — will give you that control. You never “own” the spaces they allot you, or the customer relationships you develop on their platforms. Someone once described it as “digital sharecropping” which is a great analogy.

## Bringing It All Back Home
I’m certainly not of the view that you should avoid any entanglements with these companies. That’s a tough row to hoe in 2020. What I am saying is that your ultimate aim should always be to move that customer relationship somewhere you do control.
Your website, your mailing list.
And that goes double in times of uncertainty — and we certainly have a lot of uncertainty right now. There is no telling how this public health crisis will play out globally, but one thing that seems locked-in is some form of economic downturn almost everywhere. And probably a significant and extended one in many places.
That is never welcome, of course, but indie authors should also be aware that the digital parts of publishing are probably more insulated from an economic shock than the bits of the book business which relies on moving lots of paper around the place and selling it in physical stores. Readers having less money is never good, on many levels, but indies should also keep in mind that books are a relatively cheaper form of entertainment, especially at the prices we routinely sell at.
I’m not saying we are immune to the deleterious effects of a downturn, but we might be insulated from the worst of it — at least initially. There’s no telling how something like that will play out once it gets going, but I’d be a lot more worried if I was a bookstore owner or a traditional publisher or otherwise overly reliant on print sales.
On the other hand, if these political winds keep blowing, and anti-trust actions really get rolling, and one or more of the big tech companies gets pulled down into the mire, there’s no telling what effect that could have. But it’s almost certain that any negative effects would be more keenly felt by self-publishers (and digitally focused small presses) than traditional publishing.
It’s all a big ball of uncertainty for everyone in the book business.
But rather than worrying about it, take that energy and turn it into something positive. Instead of fretting about how dependent you are on outside forces, instead wrest back some of that control and start plotting out a path to self-sufficiency.
For example, if Google went offline tomorrow, I would lose a lot of website traffic, but it wouldn’t kill me. If Facebook got broken up or shut down, I would lose one of my main sources of new readers, but it wouldn’t put me out of business. Even if Amazon disappeared overnight, that would really, really hurt me, taking away a big chunk of income.
But it wouldn’t destroy me because I have a lot of my readers on my mailing list now. And once you have a large list of readers, you have a much better chance of surviving anything the world throws at you, because you can always start again…. without starting from zero.

## Practical Steps to Independence
If you haven’t started a mailing list yet, do it today. If you have a mailing list but you are only using it to announce new releases, consider pivoting to a more regular newsletter so you can really unlock the power of email marketing.
And if you already have a regular newsletter, then start really zooming in on your key metrics and make sure you are not missing any opportunity to optimize your whole operation. I’m not just talking about subscriber count — there’s too much focus on it — but your open rates and click rates and unsubscribe rates and general engagement levels as well.
That first email in your welcome sequence might look good with a 60% open rate. Now calculate how many subscribers you would have today if it had been 65% or 70% over the last year. Or 90%. When you run those numbers, you will see that even a moderate increase in key numbers like this can have a huge effect over time.
Growing a mailing list is a slow burn, so be patient. You don’t need to do everything at once or become an email mastermind overnight. Try and make small incremental improvements on this front every week and you will be amazed at where you are in twelve months.
It’s the best thing any author can do to future proof their business, guarantee their independence, and protect their income. No matter what happens next.

## Further Resources
If you are not a self-publisher but this post has you thinking that publishing some of your work digitally might be a smart play right now, well, I don’t disagree. The latest edition of my self-publishing guide is free on all retailers. Get yer download links here.
If you are taking a bare bones approach to email right now and need a little more convincing to switch to a regular newsletter, I strongly recommend this post on unlocking the power of email marketing.
If you are sold on the idea of doing more with email and want to read The Best Guide Ever written by a genuine expert, then Newsletter Ninja by Tammi Labrecque is what you are looking for. I liked it this much.
For the nuts and bolts of how to set up your own mailing list I now have two pretty cool resources for you. My new reader magnet is a short book called Following which will teach you all that and walk you through all the steps in setting up your own website (and Facebook Page). But the only place you can get this book — meta alert! — is via my mailing list. Sign up here.
Oh and SURPRISE! I have a course now. It’s called Starting From Zero and will teach you how to publish your books like a pro, how to lock down your author branding, how to build an excellent reader capturing platform, and then how to construct a marketing plan to throw your book into the charts, one which works with the Amazon algorithms rather than against them.
It’s 100% free, initial reviews from students are phenomenal, and over 2,500 authors have already started it since it launched on Friday. Yeah, just a little ahead of projections on that one. Enroll here.

--------------------------

Free Step-by-Step Ebook Formatting Guide | DIY
Posted by David Gaughran 11 February 2023. Publishing, Resources • 48 Comments.

## The article starts below, but first: FREE STUFF!
You have three options when it comes to formatting an ebook:
1. Hire a pro
2. Use a specialized conversion tool
3. Code the ebook yourself in HTML
This guide to ebook formatting covers the third option – the DIY approach. Here’s an overview of the process:
- Preparation
- Cleaning Up in Word
- Coding in Notepad++
- Compiling in Caliber
- Testing
Preparation
Cleaning Up in Word
Coding in Notepad++
Compiling in Caliber
Testing
And if you are seeking information on the other two approaches instead – i.e. hiring a pro or using a tool – check out my free guide to self-publishing which has specific advice and recommendations on that.

## warning
I don’t want to dissuade any of the adventurous types wishing to format their own books but a word of caution is appropriate.
Before we get into this, I’m not a professional ebook formatter. If you want a guide to ebook formatting written by a true expert, then check out Guido Henkel’s Zen of eBook Formatting.
This is my own personal process for formatting an ebook, but it does draw heavily on a series of blog posts Guido Henkel wrote in 2010, which you can still find here. I relied on that series for many years as I built my first ebooks. But over time, I started making more and more notes about where I was deviating from the path Guido had charted out, so I thought I’d now publish that here in case it’s useful for anyone.
After clocking up ten years’ experience making my own ebooks, I do a few things differently – but these are predominantly stylistic preferences, or my preferred best practices in terms of ebook layout, or the odd policy change from Amazon here and there.

### A Much Bigger Caveat
You will need a fair bit of patience to get through the DIY formatting process. At least the first time. It becomes much less of a head melter after you first format an ebook successfully, but you will be tearing your hair out that first time. Be warned! That said, I actually love formatting my own ebooks; I find it weirdly soothing.
I can fix errors at the drop of a hat, fiddle with my end matter to my heart’s content, and I could even hang out my shingle as an ebook formatter now, if I needed a side-hustle. It’s a useful skill, if you are willing to work through the many frustrations that will accompany your first efforts.
It might take you a whole day to do this the first time. It could even take longer! But after doing this a few times, you’ll be able to whizz through the process in an hour or less. And it doesn’t take much “practice” to reach that point. That first time is a bear though! You have been warned.

### Special Warning for Mac Users
This is written for PC peeps. Don’t swear at me; I don’t have a Mac and you actually have a much better piece of software (and an easier time formatting your books).
Check out TextWrangler, and follow along as best you can – I think it will be easy enough, I’m just flagging it in case some steps are slightly different for you. You should have a much easier time of it than the PC army, from what I hear about TextWrangler.

### A Specific Note for Children’s Authors
Formatting children’s books are a special challenge andI don’t recommend the below method. Hiring a pro is probably best here but if you want to explore the specialist approach of formatting your own children’s books then check out this post from Darcy Pattinson.
I also recommend this book from Karen Inglis if you want a full guide to publishing and marketing children’s books, and this guest post she wrote for this here site too.

The process of formatting an ebook takes your manuscript and freezes it in place as-is, so make sure it is edited and error free and that you are 100% done fiddling, or else it’s all the way back to the start of this process again — which you really won’t want to do, believe me.
Make sure your front and end matter is exactly how you want it to appear in the e-book – your title/copyright page, any About the Author page, any links to your mailing list, other books, website, social channels, and a place where readers can review your book. All that stuff should be laid out exactly how you want it to appear to readers. Everything bar the table of contents, which we will handle separately (delete it from your manuscript, if you made one yourself).

All these reader requests are known as CTAs – calls-to-action – and they are crucial to an author’s success. I call this Peak Reader Love moment because a reader will never have a more positive opinion of you than the moment they finish your book – presuming you have done your job as a writer.
Which makes it the perfect time to ask them for something, whether that’s a purchase of Book 2, a sign-up, a review, a website visit, or a social follow.
This latter point is really, really important and will have a massive influence on how successful you are. Read Chapter 6 of my free self-publishing guide – Let’s Get Digital – if you haven’t figured out the best way to lay out all your front matter and end matter, in particular those reader requests.
Let me stress, doing this is really important.
Oh, and I use Word for the second phase, so that’s what I’ll refer to below, but any basic word processor should suffice.

The very first thing you should do is save a fresh copy of your finished, proofed, perfectly laid out manuscript.
This is in case you screw anything up, which you probably will the first time. It’s always good to have a master copy of your edited, proofed manuscript in case of any techno-mishaps.
Because I’m paranoid, I have like eight master copies of everything as well as Dropbox, flash drives, and the most elegant solution of all: repeatedly emailing things to myself. Anyway…
Next, it’s time to conduct some find-and-replace maneuvers. If your manuscript is anything like mine, it might have a mix of “smart” and “dumb” quotes, apostrophes, and ellipses. This will convert them all to “smart” ones and will ensure they are all pointing the right way when we convert them to HTML.
This is really easy to do, just input the quotation mark into the Find box, then select Replace, and input the same quotation mark again. Word is clever enough to figure out which way everything should be pointing. Do this for double quotes, single quotes, and ellipses.
Now you have to replace all italics with HTML code. Go back to your Find/Replace box in Word. Click into the Find part, and then hit CTRL-I which will search for every bit of italicized text in your manuscript. In the Replace box, paste in this bit of code – <i>^&</i> – which will wrap all italics with a bit of HTML. We’ll need that later.

```
<i>^&</i>
```

Finally, replace any ellipses with this bit of code – &hellip; – and then you are done with the Word part of proceedings.

```
&hellip
```

However, before we get into wrangling the HTML itself, a quick note on why you might want to build two separate editions of your book… or even more than that, depending on your needs.

All ebook retailers use the industry standard EPUB format these days, although until recently Amazon went its own way, as it often does, and required the use of a different format (MOBI – in case you hear reference to it).
This meant that we had to build one edition of our ebooks for Amazon, and another for everywhere else.
A bit of a pain, of course, but self-publishers love turning lemons into lemonade, and authors quickly discovered huge benefits from making custom Amazon editions of their books, particularly from putting links in the back of the book going directly to the Kindle Store, rather than their own website. Any time you reduce the steps a reader has to take, you increase chances of them buying a book, and of course this made it much easier to complete purchases on dedicated ereaders like the standard Kindles – which only have the most rudimentary browsers.
As such, I strongly recommend making two editions of your book – two separate EPUBS – and putting direct Amazon links in the back of the Amazon edition, and generic links to your website in the back of the edition for all non-Amazon retailers. Note: some retailers and distributors will block your books if they have links to Amazon, so the separate edition is crucial here.
It’s worth the extra step, and it might even be worth creating retailer-specific editions for the more important books in your catalogue, like a permafree or series opener.
Now I’ll show you how to do it.

Here we move from messing around in Word to using a proper HTML editor – it’s called Notepad++ and you can download it free. It’s PC-only, but Mac users have access to an even better piece of software called TextWrangler.
Before we dive into Notepad++ we need to clean out all the hidden gunk in Word because a typical file has all sorts of hidden HTML, which is what can make your ebook go screwy if you just try and upload a Word file to Amazon (please never do that).
Select your entire manuscript in Word, and then copy and paste it into a “dumb” word processor like (regular) Notepad. This will strip out all the hidden HTML code. It will also remove things like italics, which is why we wrapped those sections in code first.
We are going to dump this “clean” manuscript in our HTML editor in a moment, but first we’ll create a “shell” in Notepad++ to apply some styles to this blob o’ text, so save that file in Notepad for now and open Notepad++.

Once you have formatted your first book, you will have your own “shell” that you can apply to all future books, but you can borrow mine and tweak it as desired so that you style your ebooks the way you like and then just copy that every time you publish a new book.
This is what my shell looks like. I’ll explain everything in a minute. Sorry if this is difficult to read, it’s hard to display HTML code on a webpage because HTML is the code that tells a webpage to do things! I also want to make sure you can copy and paste this and use it yourself.
(Fun trivia: ebooks are essentially a series of HTML pages with a big ‘ol wrapper around them.)

```
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?> <!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd"> <head> <style type="text/css"> html, body, div, h1, h2, h3, h4, h5, h6, ul, ol, dl, li, dt, dd, p, pre, table, th, td, tr { margin: 0; padding: 0em; } p { text-indent: 1em; margin-bottom: 0.2em; } p.noindent { text-indent: 0em; margin-bottom: 0.2em; } p.head { text-indent: 0em; font-weight: bold; font-size: 1.5em; margin-bottom: 0.2em; } p.head2 { text-indent: 0em; font-weight: bold; font-size: 1.25em; margin-bottom: 0.2em; } p.chapter { text-indent: 0em; font-weight: bold; font-size: 2em; page-break-before: always; margin-top:3em; margin-bottom:1em; } p.centered { text-indent: 0em; text-align: center; } span.centered { text-indent: 0em; text-align: center; } </style> </head> <body> ***INSERT BOOK HERE*** </body>
```


```
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?> <!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd"> <head> <style type="text/css"> html, body, div, h1, h2, h3, h4, h5, h6, ul, ol, dl, li, dt, dd, p, pre, table, th, td, tr { margin: 0; padding: 0em; } p { text-indent: 1em; margin-bottom: 0.2em; } p.noindent { text-indent: 0em; margin-bottom: 0.2em; } p.head { text-indent: 0em; font-weight: bold; font-size: 1.5em; margin-bottom: 0.2em; } p.head2 { text-indent: 0em; font-weight: bold; font-size: 1.25em; margin-bottom: 0.2em; } p.chapter { text-indent: 0em; font-weight: bold; font-size: 2em; page-break-before: always; margin-top:3em; margin-bottom:1em; } p.centered { text-indent: 0em; text-align: center; } span.centered { text-indent: 0em; text-align: center; } </style> </head> <body> ***INSERT BOOK HERE*** </body>
```

### Decoding The Noise
OK. What does any of that mean? I honestly don’t know what all of it means, but I do know that I shouldn’t mess with the first seven lines or Bad Things Happen. The rest of the stuff there is the styles that we totally will play with.
For example this bit of code here is your standard paragraph style:

```
p { text-indent: 1em; margin-bottom: 0.2em; }
```


```
p { text-indent: 1em; margin-bottom: 0.2em; }
```

It just has two elements, one inserting a small indent, and the other creating a small gap underneath the paragraph. You adjust those settings (i.e. 1em and 0.2em) if you like but I think they are good as is.
This next style is for when I want a new paragraph, but don’t want an indent – i.e. after a chapter or scene break or a list. So I called it p.noindent – but you can use whatever you like. You can see it’s the exact same as the paragraph style, just with a text-indent value of 0.

```
p.noindent { text-indent: 0em; margin-bottom: 0.2em; }
```


```
p.noindent { text-indent: 0em; margin-bottom: 0.2em; }
```

The one after that is to make nice big headings.

```
p.head { text-indent: 0em; font-weight: bold; font-size: 1.5em; margin-bottom: 0.2em; }
```


```
p.head { text-indent: 0em; font-weight: bold; font-size: 1.5em; margin-bottom: 0.2em; }
```

And then this one is for sub-headings, so a little smaller. You can see I’ve adjusted the font-size value their slightly. You can tweak this if you like.

```
p.head2 { text-indent: 0em; font-weight: bold; font-size: 1.25em; margin-bottom: 0.2em; }
```


```
p.head2 { text-indent: 0em; font-weight: bold; font-size: 1.25em; margin-bottom: 0.2em; }
```

This style is for a new chapter – this applies a big heading, some space above and below the chapter heading, and also flags that it’s a new chapter for when we auto-compile the table of contents later.

```
p.chapter { text-indent: 0em; font-weight: bold; font-size: 2em; page-break-before: always; margin-top:3em; margin-bottom:1em; }
```


```
p.chapter { text-indent: 0em; font-weight: bold; font-size: 2em; page-break-before: always; margin-top:3em; margin-bottom:1em; }
```

Finally, all this code is just to center text. Make sure to include all that span code – this is for Apple devices which need specific instructions to center anything for some reason. THANKS STEVE JOBS.

```
p.centered { text-indent: 0em; text-align: center; } span.centered { text-indent: 0em; text-align: center; }
```


```
p.centered { text-indent: 0em; text-align: center; } span.centered { text-indent: 0em; text-align: center; }
```

### How It Looks In Notepad++
Just so you can see it in “action” here is a screenshot of the HTML code from Notepad++ of my book Following – from the start of the <body> tag to the end of the second paragraph of the introduction – just so you can see how we actually apply the styles in the manuscript itself.
Don’t worry about the other bits of code just yet – we’ll get to that. I just wanted to show you an example of what it looks like in Notepad++ in the finished version, when you’re done massaging the text.

Let’s return to that “shell” I gave you up top again, this time with a template inserted for your own copyright/title page that you can adjust as needed. I’ve just inserted some square brackets where you need to fill in your own author name, editor, book title and so on.
You can copy and paste this into your blank Notepad++ file so you have your own “shell” to dump your manuscript into.

```
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?> <!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd"> <head> <style type="text/css"> html, body, div, h1, h2, h3, h4, h5, h6, ul, ol, dl, li, dt, dd, p, pre, table, th, td, tr { margin: 0; padding: 0em; } p { text-indent: 1em; margin-bottom: 0.2em; } p.noindent { text-indent: 0em; margin-bottom: 0.2em; } p.head { text-indent: 0em; font-weight: bold; font-size: 1.5em; margin-bottom: 0.2em; } p.head2 { text-indent: 0em; font-weight: bold; font-size: 1.25em; margin-bottom: 0.2em; } p.chapter { text-indent: 0em; font-weight: bold; font-size: 2em; page-break-before: always; margin-top:3em; margin-bottom:1em; } p.centered { text-indent: 0em; text-align: center; } span.centered { text-indent: 0em; text-align: center; } </style> </head> <body> <p class="centered"><span class="centered"><strong>BOOK TITLE</strong></span></p> <p class="centered"><span class="centered"><strong><i>Subtitle If You Have One</i></strong></span></p> <p class="centered"><span class="centered">[Author Name]</span></p> <p class="centered"><span class="centered">Editor: [Name]</span></p> <p class="centered"><span class="centered">Cover: [Name]</span></p> </br> <p class="centered"><span class="centered">First Edition published [insert date]</span></p> <p class="centered"><span class="centered">Copyright &copy; 2020 [Author Name]</span></p> <p class="centered"><span class="centered">[EPUB] Edition</span></p> <p class="centered"><span class="centered">This ebook is licensed for your personal enjoyment only and may not be re-sold or given away to others. Thank you for respecting the hard work of this author.</span></p> *** INSERT BOOK HERE *** </body>
```


```
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?> <!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd"> <head> <style type="text/css"> html, body, div, h1, h2, h3, h4, h5, h6, ul, ol, dl, li, dt, dd, p, pre, table, th, td, tr { margin: 0; padding: 0em; } p { text-indent: 1em; margin-bottom: 0.2em; } p.noindent { text-indent: 0em; margin-bottom: 0.2em; } p.head { text-indent: 0em; font-weight: bold; font-size: 1.5em; margin-bottom: 0.2em; } p.head2 { text-indent: 0em; font-weight: bold; font-size: 1.25em; margin-bottom: 0.2em; } p.chapter { text-indent: 0em; font-weight: bold; font-size: 2em; page-break-before: always; margin-top:3em; margin-bottom:1em; } p.centered { text-indent: 0em; text-align: center; } span.centered { text-indent: 0em; text-align: center; } </style> </head> <body> <p class="centered"><span class="centered"><strong>BOOK TITLE</strong></span></p> <p class="centered"><span class="centered"><strong><i>Subtitle If You Have One</i></strong></span></p> <p class="centered"><span class="centered">[Author Name]</span></p> <p class="centered"><span class="centered">Editor: [Name]</span></p> <p class="centered"><span class="centered">Cover: [Name]</span></p> </br> <p class="centered"><span class="centered">First Edition published [insert date]</span></p> <p class="centered"><span class="centered">Copyright &copy; 2020 [Author Name]</span></p> <p class="centered"><span class="centered">[EPUB] Edition</span></p> <p class="centered"><span class="centered">This ebook is licensed for your personal enjoyment only and may not be re-sold or given away to others. Thank you for respecting the hard work of this author.</span></p> *** INSERT BOOK HERE *** </body>
```

See that bit at the bottom where it says ***INSERT BOOK HERE*** like some kind of demented litbot? This is where you will paste your gunk-free, prepared manuscript which you saved earlier in (regular) Notepad.

### Massaging The Text
Now cut and paste the whole manuscript again from (regular) Notepad into Notepad++ right where my “shell” tells you to insert the book – which is inbetween the <body> and </body> tags and below all the copyright guff.

```
<body>
```


```
</body>
```

Make sure not to remove these tags! The second one especially is easy to accidentally delete.
With your manuscript pasted in, now it’s time to massage the text into place. I find this part weirdly soothing – like bringing order on a chaotic world. Which makes me sound like Judge Dredd. Hey, if the helmet fits…
Before we go any further, save your Notepad file.
I usually build the Amazon EPUB edition first, make sure it’s error free using a free online checker, and then build the EPUB for the non-Amazon retailers.
So I save this first file as BookNameAmazonEPUB.html and work from there.

```
BookNameAmazonEPUB.html
```

At this point, you should open a regular web browser, like Chrome or whatever you use to surf the internet.
Load that BookNameAmazonEPUB.html file, or whatever you have decided to call it, into your browser. It will look like a mess right now, but we are about to massage it all into place and will periodically reload this window to check on our progress.

```
BookNameAmazonEPUB.html
```

### Keep Checking In Your Browser
For example, here’s what the opening to my book Following looks like when viewed in a web browser – close enough to how it looks on an e-reader, and a useful way to check if you mess anything up as you go.
You can view a few of the styles we defined in our “shell” above – the regular paragraph style, the noindent paragraph style, the chapter style, and the centering style.
Yours won’t look quite so neat… yet. So let’s get on that now.
We are going to run a series of Find-and-Replace operations, just like we did with Word in the second phase, just a lot more of them. Before that though, we need to do two things.
First, hit CTRL-F to bring up the Find-and-Replace menu in Notepad++ and make sure Regular Expressions is ticked. Search for ^(.+)$ and replace with <p>\1</p> to apply our paragraph style to each paragraph.

```
^(.+)$
```


```
<p>\1</p>
```

Second, before we continue with the rest of our Find-and-Replace tags, we must do something quite important: comb the entire text for any stray italics tags or paragraph tags – if we don’t do that now, it can cause huge problems for us later. (BTW, checking the HTML file in your browser window periodically can help all through this entire phase.)
Okay, we are finally ready to bash this into shape with a series of Find-and-Replace operations.
You might have noticed a weird question mark symbol dotted through your manuscript when viewing the HTML file in a web browser. These related to various special characters – like em dashes, quotation marks, apostrophes and so on – and we need to replace them with something called “HTML named entites” so they render properly on a Kindle or an iPhone or a computer or whatever your reader happens to be using.

### HTML Named Entities
The most common HTML named entities are copied below, but if you have something else weird, like a character with an accent in their name or something, then check this more complete list. (Note: use right single quote for your apostrophes.)
I’ve included the HTML named entity for ellipses above, but you might remember we already handled that in the Word document earlier – this is because doing a Find-and-Replace on a period symbol can make things go very wrong!
Now need to replace all special characters in your document with HTML named entities like those above. For example, to replace all your em dashes, hit CTRL-F (make sure Regular Expressions is still ticked) and then Find-and-Replace the em dash symbol — with &mdash; – and you can just let it Replace All rather than going through them individually.

```
—
```


```
&mdash;
```

Repeat that process for all your quotes, apostrophes and any other special characters. Check your work periodically in your web browser.
Once all that is done, it’s time to apply all those paragraph styles – this is where it really starts coming together and it’s fun to view it take shape in a browser as you go (also recommended so that you know where and when you went wrong, as you invariably will at some point).
You might remember we wrapped the entire text of your book in regular paragraph tags. Now we need to go in and change some of those to various styles like chapter, noindent, and so on.

### Find-and-Replace
This step takes the longest, but I find it kind of fun. (I do not promise you will find ebook formatting fun!) This is what you need to do:
- Replace the <p> tag in all chapter headings with <p class="chapter">
- Where you have a chapter opening or the start of a new scene after a scene break, or anywhere else you want to commence a paragraph without an indent, then replace the <p> tag with <p class="noindent">
- Any headings, you need replace the <p> tag with <p class="head">
- And so on for centering, sub-headings, or any styles you added yourself.

```
<p>
```


```
<p class="chapter">
```


```
<p>
```


```
<p class="noindent">
```


```
<p>
```


```
<p class="head">
```

Remember to regularly check your work as you go in a browser. This step can take forever the first time you do it, but you can get super fast with practice (for example, I keep my code tags in a little (regular) Notepad doc while doing this and just turbo my way through pasting them where needed).
The reason why it’s important to check in a browser periodically is that if you take a wrong turn you can undo the last step or two and identify the problem. It’s usually a misplaced HTML tag (or a missing one to close what you were doing, like turning off italics, or not closing off a paragraph with a </p> tag).

```
</p>
```

To give you some reference point, here’s a snapshot of what a bit of Following looks like in Notepad++.
And then here’s that same section previewed in a web browser.
Along the way, you might need to use additional HTML tags. For example <strong> will bold a text – just remember to close it off with </strong> when you want to stop bolding. </br> will give you a carriage return with no text – useful for scene breaks. You don’t need to close that tag off – one of the few standalone tags.

```
<strong>
```


```
</strong>
```


```
</br>
```

### Simple HTML Tips
Keep in mind that you can’t use some HTML tags in an ebook – not everything will work. But you should be covered for most things above. One extra thing you will definitely need is learning how to build a clickable link.
This is how you do a link. This is how you do an image. And this is how you do an image link. That site is wonderful for learning HTML, by the way.
Once you are done massaging everything into place – and that end matter can get a bit fiddly, but persevere until it looks fab – then it’s time to open up Caliber and actually compile your finished ebook so it’s readable by and device. Exciting!
Don’t worry, we haven’t forgotten about the non-Amazon edition – we’ll circle back and build that very quickly once we have finished and tested the Amazon edition.

Caliber is the tool I recommend for compiling ebooks. You can download it free here for PC or Mac.
While that’s downloading, do one last check of your HTML file for errors – both in Notepad++ and in a web browser for errors. Test all your links, look for any unconverted special characters, and make sure you’re happy with your front and end matter as no changes can be made once you upload your file to Caliber without restarting the whole process from this point onwards.
Now that you have been warned, open Caliber.

### Step-by-Step
Click Add Books in the top left and select your finished HTML file.
Click the next button along – Edit Metadata – and fill out all the fields. This will attach some metadata to your book, but I don’t think any of the retailers pay it any attention. I always do it just in case though.
Make sure you use a small file size for the cover. This greatly reduces your overall file size, which means you make more per copy sold on Amazon. This could cost you thousands of dollars over time if you don’t keep your file size low. I use a low-res cover 600px wide, and reduce the file size using this handy free tool. When finished, click OK.
Hit the next button – Convert Books. This is the meat of the ebook formatting process with Caliber. As mentioned, I do the Amazon EPUB first, and then if the file passes validation, I go back and do the non-Amazon EPUB.
Select EPUB from the top-right menu before you do anything else.
Ignore everything except for what I tell you. There are some crazy settings in here and I have no idea what they do… except break everything.
Click Structure Detection in the menu on the left-hand side. At the Chapter Mark dropdown, select NONE. Then, in the field headlined “Insert Page Breaks before…” delete that jumble of text.
Click Table of Contents, the next one down in that left-hand list. In the field marked “Level 1 TOC” insert the following text exactly: //h:p[re:test(@class, "chapter", "i")]

```
//h:p[re:test(@class, "chapter", "i")]
```

Click EPUB Output and check the box “Preserve Cover Aspect Ratio.”
Finally, click OK in the bottom right-hand corner to compile your ebook! This takes a minute, so scratch your nose.
Click Save To Disk in the top menu bar.

### Validating Your EPUB
Open your EPUB, page through it, look for errors – especially check things like the links in the end matter etc. If you don’t have any free app on your computer to read EPUBs, Adobe Digital Editions is both good and free.
Once you have given the file a once over with human eyes, and are happy with the result, you need to give it a once over with the less forgiving eyes of a robot. Validate your EPUB here.
If it returns errors (or if you spot something during your more human review), I’m afraid you will have to open your HTML file in Notepad++, find them and fix them (not always easy, but persist!) and then repeat the above steps to compile the book in Caliber again.
If there are no errors, proceed to compile the the non-Amazon EPUB in exactly the same way as you just did for the Amazon EPUB.
Just remember to take out those links to Amazon! Other retailers can block your book if they detect them – they can be super sensitive to anything Amazon.
That’s it! You have files for all the ebook retailers now… and now you also know ebook formatting!

## Testing
You might have done a lot of testing along the way, but I recommend you do a little more now too, especially important when you are just learning how to format. I like to side-load the Amazon EPUB to my Kindle and page through it. You can also use the various online previewers at the various retailers to check your work.
I recommend being thorough before actually publishing something, and that goes triple for your first rodeo. Once you are happy, upload and enjoy the fruits of your labor!
Pop your questions on formatting an ebook in the box below. I’ll get a ping right away, and answer you once I’m done with this ice sculpture.

--------------------------

Facebook Engagement Bait and Shadow Bans
Posted by David Gaughran 13 April 2021. Marketing • 14 Comments.

## The article starts below, but first: FREE STUFF!
Authors using Facebook can unknowingly practice what is known as engagement bait, and could be in danger of receiving shadow bans.
Websites try to keep your attention as long as possible, but the stakes are higher on Facebook where a drop in engagement can cost millions of dollars. Or FACEBOOK as it now insists on calling itself, like a shouty man outside a pub.
Content which keeps people on Facebook – like video or pictures – gets much more organic reach than content which sends people away, such as a link to your books on Amazon. Not only that, Facebook will also give preference to content which is genuinely engaging.
Please note the emphasis.
Facebook doesn’t have an army of humans sifting through the billions of pieces of content on Facebook and giving a gold star to the best of it – AI does the heavy lifting here. The way the system measures engagement is necessarily crude: what is getting Likes, comments, and shares?
In simple terms, people want engaging content and Facebook wants to show them content with high engagement, so if you can post content which triggers good engagement levels, then that content will get much more visibility.
And visibility can be worth a lot of money, of course.
Some people will seek to game engagement because it is so valuable. And like virtually any cheap marketing gimmick, doing this is actually quite counterproductive.
I’m surprised that what is known as “engagement bait” — don’t worry, I’ll have some clear examples for you in a minute — is still recommended by so-called experts because Facebook’s system has been pro-actively seeking out such content and vigorously suppressing it for over two years.
But let’s rewind.

## Facebook Engagement Bait Defined
What is engagement bait, exactly? What are the rules around this stuff? How can you avoid being penalized? And what can you do instead to garner this all-important engagement? Let’s take those in turn.
Facebook show some commendable clarity here and define it succinctly:
“Engagement bait is a tactic to create Facebook posts that goad people into interacting, through likes, shares, comments, and other actions, in order to artificially boost engagement and get greater reach on News Feed.“
Facebook even goes on to identify multiple types of engagement bait: vote baiting, react baiting, share baiting, tag baiting, and comment baiting. It’s all variations on a theme and you’ve seen lots of these posts before.
“Tag a friend who loves brisket,” is one I saw not long ago from a (normally) savvy BBQ festival.
“Share with five people to win a weekend in Scranton,” would be hilarious but is verboeten now.
This kind of inorganic engagement prodding is not tolerated by Facebook — so serious about it, in fact, that actual examples are provided, in another welcome moment of clarity.
Feel free to click those examples above if you want to see the official Facebook guidance on Engagement Bait, or zoom in on those examples a little better. But don’t go looking for holes in the fences.
In case anyone thinks this is a dumb algorithm that you can circumvent by kicking up a little dust, let me be clear: Facebook aren’t messing around here. The system can even detect engagement bait in the audio track of video content.
The message is clear: don’t do it.
That’s not to say Facebook can’t get this wrong, or sanction accounts incorrectly – that happens all the time. I’m just saying that Facebook’s tolerance for this kind of thing is pretty low and it seems to be making a concerted effort to root it out.
I’m sure you still see stuff like this in your feed, but I guarantee you that this content has been demoted – suppressed, essentially – and is visible to far, far less people than it would be without the engagement bait. Keep in mind that you don’t know how much money the advertiser is spending to push that content, or that they are probably torching their money too.

Facebook is being a little like that Supreme Court justice in the 1960s who famously defined p*rn by simply saying “he knows it when he sees it.” (If you want a far better definition of p*rn, by the way, look up what Chilean author Isabel Allende had to say…)
Instead, Facebook is suggesting some guiding principles. It wants authentic engagement, not posts which “goad” users into engagement, to use Facebook’s own terminology.
By the way, while we are on the topic, one thing that will really help your authentic engagement levels is having professional graphics and branding. I have a free Canva tutorial on how to make pro-level Facebook graphics over on my new YouTube channel. I’m publishing lots of guides like this over there, so make sure you subscribe so you don’t miss anything.
Warning: contains extreme quarantine beard.
Back to Facebook and its rules. The bar for what it considers to be authentic might be higher than you think.
Facebook will consider “LIKE this if you LOVE kick-ass heroines!” to be engagement bait and will demote that content. And this applies to both posts from Pages and individuals too, just in case anyone’s lizard-brain was working in that direction.
Somewhat understandably, Facebook doesn’t want to sketch out the exact line, because it knows that those seeking to game the system will tiptoe right up to it… and then look for loopholes.
Facebook is instead urging everyone to only post content which is authentically engaging, not content which tricks people to engage, or seeks to elicit engagement responses which are not directly related to the content itself, or anything which artificially boosts engagement in any way.
To be clear – as I know many of you will ask – I don’t think Facebook’s target is the kind of giveaway hosted off Facebook that can be popular with authors, where you are often asked to Like someone on Facebook and follow them on BookBub and share their tweet for competition entries.
The target here is the kind of pleading posts on Facebook itself begging for Likes and shares and so on.
And despite Facebook’s (understandable) equivocation, I think the line is pretty obvious. “LIKE this post if you think Tom Hardy is hot!” would be a problematic piece of engagement bait. But posting a picture of Tom Hardy and naturally attracting Likes because he is a total dreamboat would be perfectly fine.
Whether doing the latter is still a good idea for your business or not is another matter, and depends on exactly what type of audience you are seeking to build – more on that in a moment.
Personally, I think the above examples (both mine and Facebook’s) are clear enough to know what must be avoided, especially when contrasted with the best practice advice you should be following instead, which I go through below. These approaches are worlds apart – there’s no point trying to map the vast hinterlands inbetween.
Despite everything I have said, some of you might still think this is worth risking. I urge you to reconsider, because Facebook further goes on to say that, “Pages that repeatedly share engagement bait posts will see more significant drops in reach.”
In short, if you keep posting engagement bait, you will get shadowbanned.

## How Can We Get Engaged?
Be engaging! I’m not being facetious. Okay, fine; I’m being a little bit facetious. But there’s no “trick” here. You need to put in the effort.
Spend some time thinking about your target audience, and post things that they find engaging.
There are landmines here too, though. As you have heard me say numerous times before, the very sustainability of your promotional efforts is increasingly dependent on developing a sense of your Ideal Reader, and then marketing to them exclusively. Targeting rules.
That’s just as true for building an organic audience on Facebook as it is for targeting your BookBub or Amazon Ads. In other words, you don’t want to post that video of 62 Labrador puppies frolicking in a swimming pool, as cute as it may be, and as many Likes as it might attract. You need to post something that will specifically appeal to your audience. Something that only they will enjoy, not something for a general crowd.
If you need more specific advice on that point, please read my guide to content marketing, and the universal principles behind all great content.
I keep hammering home this point about targeting because it is absolutely critical and the biggest mistake people make with this stuff.
Constantly posting pictures of puppies will get you engagement – lots and lots of easy engagement – but ask yourself this: are you building an audience of readers or puppy lovers? Let’s term this dog-baiting and skip that too.
Sorry, Mr. Pickles! You’re still a good boy.

## One last thing…
I hope you enjoyed this post! I just wanted to let you know that I send out exclusive content every Friday to my mailing list subscribers.
I talk about the latest tricks with Facebook Ads or BookBub Ads, I also get into topics like content marketing, reader targeting, and everything else under the sun that pertains to building audience and reaching readers.
By signing up to my list, you get access to the all the old emails too, as well as sneak previews of upcoming books (meaning you get the jump on the latest tricks strategies of everyone else), and exclusive discounts too.
You also get a FREE copy of Following – a book that you can’t get anywhere else! I strongly recommend that you join over ten thousand authors and sign up today because there are all sorts of bonuses you will enjoy.

--------------------------

Apple Books For Authors - Now With PC Access
Posted by David Gaughran 3 April 2021. Publishing, Resources • 41 Comments.

Apple Books For Authors has launched and the all-new site now provides help with every stage in the self-publishing process. And here’s the biggest news of all: PC users can now publish direct with Apple Books. That’s right!
Before now, anyone using a PC device could not easily publish direct with Apple Books and many had to use a distributor to reach all of Apple’s customers. Now that has changed, and the new Apple Books publishing portal is accessible by web browser, and on a PC too.
That’s going to be the headline news for many people, so I just wanted to get that out of the way up top. But before we dig into that a little more, let’s take a look at some of the other aspects of Apple Books For Authors – which only threw open its doors to the public this very morning.
Hot off the presses, people.
You can check out the new Apple Books for Authors site here, and you’ll immediately see it has that very Apple look and branding, along with lots of advice from bestselling authors right there on the home page, and it’s all clearly designed to dovetail neatly with the new, revamped Apple Books.
If you switch your attention to the navigation bar up top, you’ll see all stages of the publishing process well represented: Write, Prepare, Publish, Market, Sales and Reporting, Audiobooks, and Resources.
Let’s take a closer look at this aspect, as I was pleasantly surprised with some of the resources here and see a lot of potential for the future.
Typically, a retailer has fairly bare bones information in this department, but Apple has taken the trouble to provide some actually useful information here—not just its own products and apps, as you would expect, but the full suite of tools a modern writer uses. Things like Microsoft Word and Scrivener appear alongside in-house apps like Pages and iBooks Author.
Naturally, the advice at this point in the process is more geared towards beginners, but if you skip ahead to the Market section, you’ll see more useful stuff for those with a little more experience—advice on how to use promo codes to build buzz, a run-down on Apple’s affiliate program for books and audiobooks (which I’m a member of and more authors really need to start using, and you can use this even if you aren’t direct with Apple, by the way), advice from bestselling authors Barbara Freethy on social media, and Jill Shalvis on book launches.
You can check out the other tabs yourself and see that there are customized resources for every stage—Audiobooks in particular are intriguing, and I know Apple wants to aggressively grow this aspect of its business. I’m particularly intrigued by mention of the ability to “suggest list price” for your audiobooks and I’ll be seeking more information on that little nugget myself.
Of course, Amazon’s Audible doesn’t let you set your price at all, and this is one of the reasons most of the innovation and chatter about audio right now surrounds the “wide” market: BookBub setting up its own audio retailer called Chirp, Kobo allowing authors to set their own prices—even to make audiobooks permafree—Findaway giving authors the tools to run discounts, BookBub Ads now allowing you to directly target audio readers. And most of those toys can only be played with by authors who are not exclusive to Amazon, and who thus have more control over their distribution and prices.
If you are not direct with Apple Books already, definitely take a look at the Sales and Reporting tab to see a video showing off the Reporting interface, which is just so much better than what we have been fobbed off with for years at KDP.

You might note that some of this stuff isn’t new—and that’s true, but a lot of the tools and resources Apple already had for authors were kind of scattered around the place and often hard to find too. Apple Books For Authors basically draws all this together under one roof, but there is some cool new stuff in there too and, overall, I got the sense that Apple plans to build that content out over time.
Apple is also keen to hear feedback on both the new Apple Books For Authors site, or the new publishing portal which PC users can now access, so please feel free to leave that in the comments and I’ll pass it along.
It’s that new publishing portal which I am most interested in personally as it means I finally get to test going direct with Apple!
I’m a PC user, and the idea of trying to publish a book with my iPhone or an emulator never appealed. Instead I used Smashwords to reach Apple, and then when Draft2Digital came along with what was, to me, a far superior service, I was happy to switch all my books across to Draft2Digital, and still use them today to reach Apple and Barnes & Noble, as well as a host of smaller stores and library services. I love Draft2Digital, and they always have authors’ backs, as they proved once again very recently.
But I’ve never actually published direct with Apple. And for the first time, I finally can. Intriguing!
(Minor correction: As pointed out by a couple of people Apple actually quietly rolled out a way to publish via PC back in September, but only through the Pages app. And it appears it was a soft launch and few knew about it. But what is 100% new today on that front is the publishing portal – which allows anyone, on PC or Mac, to provide Apple with a finished EPUB, whether that’s to update a published book or publish a new one.)
I’m sure a lot of you are in the same boat and are suddenly more curious about things like the terms for going direct.
- Apple Books pays 70% royalties for any price—even 99¢ books or $19.99 box sets, which is a marked improvement over the 35% which Amazon pays for any price outside Amazon’s preferred $2.99-$9.99 range, of course.
- Apple Books pays out within 45 days of the end of the respective month, which is a little quicker than most other retailers.
- There are no delivery fees with Apple Books, a particular bone of contention on KDP with children’s authors, graphic novelists, or anyone wanting to use pictures in their ebooks, especially with Amazon charging data transfer prices last seen when AOL was the new hotness.
You might be asking yourself whether you should switch to going direct, or continue using a distributor like Draft2Digital (or Smashwords) to reach Apple instead. Well, it depends. You will get paid a littler more, and a little quicker, if you go direct.  But using someone like Draft2Digital to reach multiple stores at once with the same ebook file does simplify your life quite a bit. You’ll have to weigh up those pros and cons yourself.
I’ll certainly be testing the new publishing portal with one of my books and sharing my thoughts on it—pros and cons—as I go through it personally, so look out for that.
I will say this though: Apple made it clear that when picking authors for promo opportunities, it is completely agnostic as to the publishing path that author has taken. Whether you arrived in the Apple Books store via the likes of Draft2Digital, or went direct, you have the same shot of getting selected.
And this, I stress, is my personal opinion: I’m sure this news will be chewed over, but my own take is that this isn’t a power play by Apple looking to cut out distributors or anything like that. I personally think the real aim here is twofold: first and foremost, to provide a clean, crisp, newbie-friendly one-stop shop for publishing with Apple Books—a nice and easy alternative to going exclusive with Amazon.
Second, I also see this as counteracting a lot of the unscrupulous providers like vanity presses, who try and sell the lie that self-publishing is difficult or expensive—at least, an easy-to-use site like this is a huge boon to those of us who try and steer new writers away from predatory operations.

## The article starts below, but first: FREE STUFF!
Again, personal opinion here, but just reading between the lines, the overall impression I got was that this isn’t just a site revamp, but perhaps also a refresh in Apple’s approach to ebooks and authors generally. The spirit driving all of this seemed to be positive and inclusive and open, and it was very welcome indeed. I’m interested to see how all this develops.
That’s it! I’ll have more hands-on impressions with that new, PC-accessible publishing portal as I go through the process personally of going direct. And I will also be interested to see what feedback you have, what resources you might like added, and what you think of this news! Let me know in the comments below.

--------------------------

13 Ways To Increase Your Email Open Rate
Posted by David Gaughran 31 January 2021. Marketing, Resources • 12 Comments.

## The article starts below, but first: FREE STUFF!
Want to increase the open rate on your emails? You’re in the right place.
Having a big email list is great, but utterly pointless if your open rate is in the toilet. Quantity might get the headlines but it’s quality which pays the bills.
You need engaged subscribers, ones that care about getting your emails, people who open your messages and act on the contents. If you are putting effort into growing your subscriber count but not proactively taking steps to assist open rates, then all you’re really doing is bailing out your boat with a leaky bucket.
I have several mailing lists, but here’s an example of one of them. These are the most recent sends.
You’ll see the open rate for all these emails is north of 50% – or will be on that most recent send once the weekend warriors get around to opening. This is typical for me and this particular list. Sometimes it’s a little higher, sometimes it’s a little lower, but performance is consistently 50%+ and it has been that way for quite a long time.
In other words, this is a large, engaged list of happy subscribers. And, needless to say, this is a well performing list. I should also note that this was typical content for this list, just an informational email, unconnected to anything like a new release which would see higher open rates and (much) higher click rates.
The point is, these kinds of numbers are totally achievable for you too, as is keeping this level over an extended period. Indeed, some authors routinely exceed these numbers. While these definitely are good numbers, I’m not posting industry-leading, earth-shattering figures here.
People often say things like “it’s natural for open rates to fall over time” – and that’s true… if you do nothing about it. Also, there are plenty of practices you might inadvertently engage in which might accelerate the natural wastage you tend to get over time. But there’s also plenty you can do to address falling open rates and even reverse them.
Yes, you can actually have increasing open rates on a large list of subscribers and maintain that trend on a growing list over time too. What witchery is this? Let’s take a look.

## 1. Change The Subject
One of the biggest factors affecting open rates is your subject line, certainly the key variable here that can be most quickly and easily addressed. Feel free to experiment with different approaches but avoid veering too much into clickbait as that will erode trust over time and is a much harder problem to then subsequently address. Things like emojis in subject lines can be very effective but be sparing with these also.
The danger with leaning too hard on crutches like emojis or clickbait, is that you might be masking some lazy copywriting. Make the subject line as snappy and hooky as you can before reaching for those solutions – and you will often find you don’t need to. Also make sure you aren’t promising something that you don’t deliver; readers may not open the next email if you engage in even the slightest bait-and-switch.
There’s some really comprehensive advice here from MailerLite on how to use subject lines to boost open rates (aff link).

## 2. Examine Your Hello
It’s all well and good to spend time lovingly crafting a welcome sequence that you think will appeal to readers, but if you aren’t periodically checking on its performance, you are just guessing on that appeal, or relying on the small sample of initial performance, which might not hold true over time for any number of reasons. Sometimes you will find that one of the emails isn’t hitting the mark and your precious new subscriber bucket has sprung a rather substantial leak. Plug it.
Let me also stress the “periodically checking” part too. I had a great welcome sequence for one of my lists, but the content morphed over time as I found my feet with that audience, and I didn’t realize there was such a disconnect between the type of material new subscribers were getting as a preview in the onboarder versus the actual “live” newsletter content. The onboarding has been working much better since that was tweaked.

## 3. Whitelisting FTW
It’s boring – for you and your readers – and only a fraction of them will ever go through the whitelisting steps, no matter how easy you make it or how often you suggest it. It’s still worth doing, though, because if someone whitelists your email address you will sail past those pesky spam filters and always dodge their Promotions tab and land right in their inbox.
I recommend doing it as part of onboarding, and then periodically suggesting it to existing subscribers too. Aside from anything else, if a good chunk of your list whitelists your email, then you need to worry less about links or images sending your emails into Promotions (or Spam!).

## 4. Check Yourself
I mentioned this tip before in my previous post on advanced email tips but it’s important enough – and underutilized enough – to bear repeating: sign up to your own list. Do it with a Gmail account, a dummy address which you don’t use regularly.
It’s important that this email address is one that your main, list-connected email has no messaging history with. Watch your welcome sequence fire, see how everything looks from the reader side, and – most crucially of all – check those emails are arriving where they should be.
I also recommend sending a test email before each send to ensure that the amount of links and images etc. isn’t sending your emails into Promotions/Spam.

## 5. Watch Your Frequency
The biggest mistake I made with email over the years was only emailing people when I had a new book – not the smartest approach for a slow writer. You need to keep in touch with your readers regularly, or else open rates will fall, along with other, crucial measures of engagement, such as click rates and the rather important part of buying your latest book.
If you need more convincing on this oh-so-important point, then make sure to read this post: Email Marketing: Your Secret Weapon.
But you can go the other way with this too. Are you emailing too often? I’ve seen some spammy internet marketers email as frequently as daily which is just crazy. A sure sign someone is just burning through subscribers and squeezing them for as much as possible before tossing them away.

## 6. Experiment with Rich Text
We’re in a constant battle with companies like Gmail. Because of the daily firehose of spam, email services must use a variety of tools to stop users getting overwhelmed (and scammed). You might think you get a lot of spam, but most of it is zapped before it even makes it to your Spam folder, let alone your inbox.
The algorithms doing the zapping aren’t infallible, of course, and lots of genuine commercial messages will end up getting axed en route. However, there are lots of things we can do at our end to increase the deliverability of our emails.
Mailerlite has a new beta feature which I’ve been playing with: Rich Text Emails (aff link). Your regular newsletters are probably HTML-based, meaning there are bits of code gubbins hidden in the message to pretty it up, and which enable all those bells and whistles you may or may not use: images, surveys, embedded video, and so on.
Rich Text Emails strip all that back to the bare essentials: text and very simple images. This should help you hit more Inboxes for your more bare-bones email sends (I started using them for my culling emails, for example, to try and reach those subscribers who are not receiving/opening my messages, for whatever reason).

## 7. Start A Conversation
One of the key attractions of modern communications is interactivity – something we can forget when caught up in broadcasting our finely crafted messages. Don’t be afraid to engage your readers in the simplest way, i.e. by asking questions. This isn’t the only way to provoke a response, of course, but it is the simplest.
Any dialogue between you and a subscriber doesn’t just engage them on an emotional level, it also looks like organic, two-way communication to the email providers and increases your chances of landing in more Inboxes. Because it is.
But also the emotional thing. Don’t want to downplay that at all, especially right now, with everything that’s going on, and all of us experiencing less face-time with the world at large.
This cuts both ways. You get great psychological benefits from this dialogue, not just your readers.

## 8. Actually Survey Your Readers
While we’re asking questions, consider doing this in a more organized way too! Mailerlite makes this super easy with embedded surveys (aff link), and you can just drag and drop a content block into your email that is easily customizable. Want to know which of your readers prefers Kobo over Kindle? Who loves audiobooks? Which characters they would love to see hook up in a spin off? Ask them!
(Then tag them in your database so you can send them tailored content in the future – like new audiobook releases, for example.)

## 9. Make The Emails Better Maybe?
Hey, at least I didn’t open with this one. But, eh, honestly? Most emails are crap. Boring old corporations have an excuse; they’re boring old corporations!
We can do better – we’re natural storytellers. And we forget that sometimes when doing sales-y stuff. Which is kind of ironic because the big trend in copywriting and content marketing now is for… storytelling!

## 10. It’s OK To Take A Break
Sometimes the well goes dry. Other times, life gets in the way, or, you know, a global crisis.
What do you do when you have an email due and nothing schedule and no earthly idea what to say? If I was one of those Perfect Productivity People, I’d tell you to dig deep and stop wussing out or some such nonsense.
Here’s the truth: it’s okay to miss an email now and then. It’s fine to skip out on a commitment sometimes. If it means you coming back next week fresh and happy and relaxed and writing a killer email that is authentic and unforced and with all the words in the right order, well, I’ll take that any day.
(But maybe try and push through it that feeling first before caving and bingeing The Expanse. At least, that’s what I have to tell myself. I’m a lazy git. You do you!)

## 11. Cull the Herd
Removing habitual non-openers from your list has a number of benefits from reducing your costs to, rather crucially, improving your overall deliverability to those who actually do want to get your emails. However, as tracking is far from infallible, it’s better to take a couple of steps first before culling anyone.

## 12. Segment and Reengage
Separate out non-openers first. Attempt to re-engage them. Then, if that fails, you can consider culling them. But before you do that, send them one last email to let them know you will be cutting them soon.
Make it a plain email (or Rich Text Email – see #6 above) with no links or images to ensure maximum deliverability. You’re bound to scoop up a few stragglers that either weren’t getting your emails because of text/links or those who were getting your emails but your provider wasn’t tracking the opens for whatever reason.
Tag all those people in your database so they don’t get bothered with re-engagement/culling emails again. And if you feel like you need something special to bring those wavering subscribers back to the light, well, bribing works. Ask any parent with a toddler!
Reader magnets (or content upgrades) can be more than just welcome gifts, you can also use content like that to periodically re-engage those who are starting to slip, as well as those who have become unresponsive altogether. Then if a freebie can’t bring them to open your email or engage with its contents, then you really can cut them with a clear conscience.

## 13. Velvet Rope Your Front-End
All this segmenting and re-engaging and bribing and culling is quite the palaver, but maybe you can cut down on a lot of this busywork by being a little more discriminate in how you seek those sign-ups in the first place. Garbage in, garbage out after all.
Wait, did I just call readers garbage? Not quite. I’m warning against treating the great reader population as fungible, faceless consumption units. Not every reader is right for your list. You are not right for every reader. Try and practice a little more self-selection at the front-end of your operation, and you’ll have less to… expel at the back-end.

## Want More?
This post from a couple of months ago has lots of advanced tips for improving the overall performance of your author newsletter, including all my recommended resources: 7 Expert Tricks To Improve Your Author Newsletter.

## One last thing…
I hope you enjoyed this post! I just wanted to let you know that I send out exclusive content every Friday to my mailing list subscribers.
I talk about the latest tricks with Facebook Ads or BookBub Ads, I also get into topics like content marketing, reader targeting, and everything else under the sun that pertains to building audience and reaching readers.
By signing up to my list, you get access to the all the old emails too, as well as sneak previews of upcoming books (meaning you get the jump on the latest tricks strategies of everyone else), and exclusive discounts too.
You also get a FREE copy of Following – a book that you can’t get anywhere else! I strongly recommend that you join over ten thousand authors and sign up today because there are all sorts of bonuses you will enjoy.

--------------------------

Going Viral: A User’s Guide
Posted by David Gaughran 29 January 2021. Marketing, Writing • 8 Comments.

What truly makes something go viral? It’s hard to say.
Sure, afterwards, we can all point to something — with the crystal clear vision bestowed by hindsight — and list off elements which contributed to the explosion: it had a cute dog bouncing on a trampoline or just the right amount of indignation, it was funny and there was a well chosen emoji, it was topical or it tapped into some lingering but unspoken resentment about a hot button issue… that list could go on forever.
Trying to assemble a Franken-thing that ticks all those boxes will quickly show you that this retrospective diagnosis is missing something — the X-factor that makes one thing go viral and another thing, which was very like it (or even “superior” in many ways), do the exact opposite.
I’m not going to tell you what that X-factor is. I’m not even sure anyone can answer that with confidence. If you had to push me, I’d say it’s probably luck, as long as we allow timing to share luck’s umbrella.
And if you think that’s a dodge, wait for this: it doesn’t matter.
Going viral has less value than you think. Unless you are more interested in celebrity than building something more meaningful, then going viral often has very little lasting value.
I’m a million times more interested in money than fame. If it was an actual choice, I wouldn’t have to think about it at all — give me the bag of gold and I’ll be a happy hermit. This might surprise anyone who hasn’t gone viral so let me share some experiences.
A close friend of mine went viral last week after posting something to Facebook. Her personal page too, not her business/author page. It wasn’t a new release announcement or ad. It wasn’t anything that was going to put money in her pocket or promote or books or company in any way. It was a funny post, but with an underlying serious message that obviously resonated with a lot of people because it got something like 30,000 Facebook shares. That’s a lot of eyeballs on a post that might otherwise have been seen by a couple of hundred people.
The first thing you should realize about something like this is that you don’t get to choose what goes viral. You might prefer it to be something which could provide more tangible benefit — like maybe something that had a link to one of your books — but you don’t get to choose what goes viral.
(I should note that these things genuinely can have real value which transcends grubby monetary concerns, and I know that my friend both enjoyed the experience in itself, and was also deeply touched by how that post made so many people feel, but we’re strictly talking about business and marketing stuff here, not the emotions of puny hoo-mans.)
And if you start pumping out stuff that is explicitly designed to go viral, you just end up turning into a clickbait pusher, telling people 7 Reasons For This and How To Do That and pretty soon you are just regurgitating the historically common elements in viral posts in an empty and robotic way, and your site descends into slideshows of desperation.
You don’t get to choose what goes viral. You can’t make something go viral. And you shouldn’t care either.
More personal experience: I’ve gone “viral” a few times. Not like meme-ing my way to an appearance on Ellen, or being shared by George Takei, but my old WordPress site was officially certified as “Stephen Fry-proof” which was a jokey designation if you were able to handle a sudden, unexpected, and massive spike of traffic, as if you had just been tweeted by Stephen Fry.
In my case, I actually was tweeted by Stephen Fry, so it was literal. I think I had 60,000 visitors in an hour or something insane like that. Luckily, I wasn’t self-hosted at that point or I could have fried my servers (and my pricing plan!). But the good people at WordPress.com had systems in place to handle viral outbreaks like this and cycle in beefier servers, so the site was able to stay online with nary a burp.

Cards on the table: the first time it happens it’s a huge rush. You are refreshing the numbers every ten seconds, watching them climb and climb and CLIMB. And, of course, because the brain often needs to be treated as a hostile witness, you start thinking, “Maybe I’ve finally made it!” or other such hilarious nonsense.
I should note that, unlike my friend’s example above, the first time this happened to me it was actually was a blog post which was totally nailed on for my audience, so it was natural to think that the traffic surge would be comprised of people I could potentially sell books to, or at least maybe get blog sign-ups, or Twitter followers, or email subscriptions.
But none of that really happened, not in meaningful numbers.
The first time, I blamed myself. I reorganized my website. I changed up my book links. I made my blog subscription more prominent. Tried to clean up my act and sharpen my hooks, and just make everything look more pro. Next time it happened… well, to be honest, I blamed myself again! And tweaked all that stuff again.
After a few times the penny started to drop. (While I am a slow learner, I’m not a total lost cause.)
Here’s the deal: this kind of traffic is drive-by traffic. The very fact that you have gone viral is usually a sign you have gone beyond your target audience.
Drive-by traffic isn’t sticky. These people don’t hang around. Well, maybe a handful will, but if you expect a meaningful chunk of the 10,000 or 100,000 or 1,000,000 people who clicked on your post — because the planets happened to align that day — to turn into fans or readers or customers or prospects, you are going to be very disappointed. It’s not junk traffic per se, but you haven’t struck gold either.
It’s kind of like press attention, in a way. Something that can be nice to happen, as long as you don’t treat it with too much seriousness, and don’t expect it to change your life or throw your book to #1 or land you a big deal.
Again, that’s not to say there is no value in going viral. In my case, I was able to influence a public conversation that I felt strongly about. That has huge personal value to me — I genuinely cared deeply about the issue. But in pure mercenary terms, it did little or nothing for me. Which makes it a terrible thing to shoot for if you are trying to sell books, or boost sign-ups, or make money, which will all need to do now and then.
What does lead to success on those fronts is the slow, hard slog of producing things that people want and getting it into their hands. Building something over time that people need, something real, something substantial. Targeting those people with laser-like precision. Drilling down into the subset that digs your stuff, whatever that may be, and working that niche crowd. Not the bigger one surrounding it.
And if you do go viral, what will make those few stick around is that slow, hard slog you have already put in, not the dog picture, however cute he might be. Sorry, Fido; you still get a treat.

## One last thing…
I hope you enjoyed this post! I just wanted to let you know that I send out exclusive content every Friday to my mailing list subscribers.
I talk about the latest tricks with Facebook Ads or BookBub Ads, I also get into topics like content marketing, reader targeting, and everything else under the sun that pertains to building audience and reaching readers.
By signing up to my list, you get access to the all the old emails too, as well as sneak previews of upcoming books (meaning you get the jump on the latest tricks strategies of everyone else), and exclusive discounts too.
You also get a FREE copy of Following – a book that you can’t get anywhere else! I strongly recommend that you join over ten thousand authors and sign up today because there are all sorts of bonuses you will enjoy.

--------------------------

7 Expert Tricks To Improve Your Author Newsletter
Posted by David Gaughran 1 January 2026. Marketing • 17 Comments.

## The article starts below, but first: FREE STUFF!
There is so much more you can do with your author newsletter these days beyond simply telling your fans that you have a new book.
Email isn’t just good at bringing you new readers, it’s uniquely good at deepening engagement with your audience. These tricks won’t just help you increase the responsiveness from your list – they’ll also help you make some cold, hard cash too.
Before we dive in to these next-level strategies, please note this is primarily intermediate/expert level stuff. If you are less experienced – or less convinced of the merits of email marketing, like contacting your readers regularly and using onboarders etc. – then read this post on the power of email marketing instead.

## 1. On The First Date, Take It Slow
Authors are getting better at offering strong enticements to sign up – commonly known as magnets or bribes or sign-up bonuses – as well as deploying automated sequences to further warm-up new subscribers. But sometimes we can be a little… overeager.
Your first priority should be to keep the promise that you made to the reader, which means ensuringthe subscription happens smoothly and they get their free ebook.
If you overload the first emails the subscriber receives, you might get dropped into Promotions or *gasp* Spam. If you’re lucky the subscriber will email you complaining they didn’t get their gift. If you’re lucky. Most probably won’t even bother complaining which means you’ve just lost a sign-up.
Don’t hit new subscribers with ten different links to all your Amazon listings and Facebook Page and Twitter account and Website and BookBub profile… at least until you have confirmed their subscription, and they have received their sign-up bonus.
There might be a little delay if you deliver your reader magnet as the first email in your welcome sequence, rather than in the confirmation email, but there are all sorts of advantages to doing so, which you will know all about if you have read Newsletter Ninja – which you really, really should.
Besides, the more CTAs you roll out at once, the more diluted the response will be. Always focus on the most important and, here, that’s getting the relationship off to the right start by keeping your word.

## 2. Always Test Deliverability
Getting your author newsletter into reader inboxes is important and making sure that initial welcome sequence does so is absolutely critical. Never leave it to chance. Not only should you minimize links (and images) in those first couple of emails, you should also test to ensure those emails aren’t dropping into Promotions or Spam.
Sign up to your list under an alternate Gmail address – specifically: one that you have never had any email history with – and send your test emails to that address instead of your own. If they drop into promotions, then you need to fiddle with that email before letting it out into the wild, whether that’s reducing images, taking out a few links, dropping some buttons, or taking out any words with a high spam score in your message or, in particular, the subject line.

## 3. Use Contextual Magnets
Reader magnets are great! Sign-up bonuses of any kind always act as a strong hook for your author newsletter, and any downsides (such as attracting freeloaders) can be deftly handled during your welcome sequence.
But not all reader magnets are created equal and sometimes it pays to think beyond a simple one-size-fits-all approach. Some bribes will appeal more to existing fans, others will do a wonderful job of bringing in new readers.
Savvy authors often have a different sign-up bonus depending on who exactly they are trying to entice on to their list. Is this reader new to me? Or is this a long-term fan who just hasn’t signed up yet?
It might be easier than you think to differentiate – just look at the entrypoint. Someone coming in via a giveaway is most likely to be a new or otherwise cold sign-up. At the other end of the spectrum, a sign up at the back of a book is most certainly a warm lead, an existing fan, and a different magnet could be optimal here. It’s more work, sure, but it might also give you a second bite of the cherry, getting some highly valuable sign-ups from those who weren’t enticed the first time around.
This is just the most obvious way that you can have contextual magnets. Non-fiction authors can really go to town here, offering all sorts of content upgrades around their site, from worksheets and checklists to video guides and ebooks, there are many possibilities. But the format isn’t as important as tailoring that piece of content to where it appears. This might sound like a lot more work, but a super customized piece of content doesn’t need to be very long if it hits the mark.
All this can apply to fiction more than you might assume. I’ve seen authors offer deleted scenes, alternative endings, spaceship schematics, case files, maps, and recipe books based on their stories.

## 4. Red Hot Affiliate Action
Warning: this is sexy and dangerous. There’s a lot of potential money to be made from affiliate schemes, but all that glittering gold can blind you to the point where you start to view your list as a cash cow… and then proceed to milk it dry. I’ve seen authors with huge lists completely destroy them after they had basically lost respect for their readers and just viewed them as numbers and dollar signs. Each of those email addresses is a real flesh-and-blood person and the second you forget that you have already lost.
There are ethical and legal concerns which you should educate yourself on with regard to affiliate schemes but the short version is if you are completely transparent about any affiliate relationships you may have, you won’t go far wrong (legally or ethically). The FTC recently made its guidelines even clearer on this stuff: you must be transparent and explicit.
One thing that can trip you up regardless are Amazon affiliate links. You can’t use them in email. This is incredibly dumb, but Amazon considers email to be “offline communication” and your affiliate account could be terminated if you drop affiliate links in your emails – and Amazon seems surprisingly sensitive to the practice, especially if you consider much more egregious sins it routinely ignores. Just don’t risk it.
Anyway, this topic is probably of limited interest to most of you. Fiction authors can monetize their newsletter in other ways by selling book-related merch (I know some authors who make crazy money with this), but affiliate schemes are usually only useful for writers of non-fiction.
If only there was some magical way of showing certain people specific niche content, and keeping it hidden from the rest…

If you don’t know what tagging and segmentation are, then read this excellent guide from MailerLite. Note: that is an affiliate link. Not only am I an affiliate for MailerLite, and use MailerLite personally, I strongly recommend that you use them too. I switched my fiction list to MailerLite in 2019 and it has been a very positive experience.
Anyway, even if you prefer another reputable and effective email service like Kit (which I have used for my non-fiction list since 2022), I still recommend perusing the MailerLite help pages regularly. They have a ton of guides like that on every imaginable email topic, with lots of video content too which makes it all very digestible. And a lot of it is general best practices which apply no matter which service you use. They are smart digital marketers.
Those who are with MailerLite can enjoy a cool new feature. Dynamic Content Blocks take segmentation and tagging to a whole new level.
The way segmentation and tagging works is already pretty cool. For example, if your erstwhile subscriber Alice Audioslave clicks on the Chirp link in your announcement of a new release, you can automatically tag them in your database as an audiobook listener.
Then the next time you want to distribute some audio ARCs, then you can specifically email the people who clicked on that link with an ARC offer. The possibilities really are endless with this, but you get the idea. You can set up separate segments or groups for “audiobook listeners” or “Barnes & Noble customers” or “readers in Australia” or whatever takes your fancy.
Some authors get very fancy with this and tailor their new release announcements, sending separate emails to their Apple customers, with Apple specific links and branding, or push their launch email out to Australian subscribers at 11:00 am in Sydney, instead of the middle of the night.
Real whizz kids take it to another level again and have all sorts of conditional automations which only kick in if subscribers take certain actions (usually if a reader clicks on a certain link).
That’s all well and good, but Dynamic Content Blocks take this one step further again, and allow you to send the same email to everyone but have different bits of content appear to any given subscriber, depending on how they are tagged. Which means that, in our above example, our diligent author would only have to send one email to all their subscribers, but the system would adjust the content to reflect their interests and preferences.
Email converts like nothing else, but you can push those rates even higher by having the content dynamically reflect readers’ interests. This is getting pretty fancy, people.

## 6. Classy goodbyes
Breaking up is never easy and it’s usually best to end on good terms. Even the most entertaining authors will get unsubscribes, but you shoud know that this is also an opportunity.
It’s not just generic sign-up forms and confirmation emails which can be customized but unsubscribe pages too. That’s right!
“But they don’t love me anymore,” you might protest, not without grounds either. Here’s the thing, though: not all unsubscribes are quitting because their love has turned to bitterness and hate over you repeatedly squeezing the toothpaste from the middle like some kind of monster; some people are just overloaded with email at that moment. Others are just… hungover.
For example, for my non-fiction author newsletter which goes out weekly (rather than monthly) my #1 unsubscribe reason is that my emails are too frequent. I don’t mind – it is supposed to be frequent! Plus, I know this doesn’t mean they hate me or my newsletter and will never buy a book from me again; they’re just swamped right now.
Even for people with the more standard monthly author newsletter, a handful of subscribers can still, at times, feel overwhelmed. It’s not about you per se but often down to the overall volume of emails they receive. Plenty of those people may still interested in you and your books, they just don’t want to be on your list right now for whatever reason.
Don’t take it personally and don’t slam the door in their face! Customize that unsubscribe email so it isn’t so cold and impersonal.
More importantly, give people the opportunity to follow you in more low-touch ways, like on Amazon or BookBub for New Release Alerts only, or on Facebook for bite-sized newsy bits, if that’s more their speed. They may come back to you – and in my experience, that happens more than you might think. Another reason to keep things friendly.
That’s just the basics. There are so many more things you could potentially do with an unsubscribe page, and MailerLite goes through just some of the possibilities here (affiliate link, of course). Particularly useful and relevant might be the example from USA Today Bestselling Author Kelsey Browning, but never be afraid to import best practices from other industries!
Getting specific advice on best practices with your author newsletter is important, of course, but also keep in mind that the publishing business tends to be a couple of steps behind the rest of the world.

## 7. Get Help With Your Author Newsletter
Don’t worry if you aren’t in a position yet to implement advanced techniques like this, it’s great just to be aware of some of the things which are possible with email. Then you can start working towards them.
Here are my recommended resources for getting to the next level with your author newsletter:

### Read This Book
Newsletter Ninja – so good, I’m mentioning it twice. Buy it, read it, do what Tammi tells you.

### Listen To This Speaker
Erica Ridley is my other favorite email expert. She often gives talks at conferences like RWA and NINC – get ready to take a lot of notes. I’m not even joking when I say my phone was overheating after one of her workshops.

### Make this hummus
Nothing to do with author newsletters, as such, but it is tasty and delicious.

### Use this email service
You need to use a specialized service to deliver your author newsletter. MailerLite is my preferred provider. It is what I use for all three of my pen names and I’m very happy with it indeed. That’s an affiliate link, of course, but feel free to do your own research.
There are a million articles out there comparing all the different services and you can read why I chose MailerLite here and check out my further thoughts after I made the move in this guide to moving from Mailchimp to MailerLite. Short version: it’s powerful, easy-to-use, very competitively priced, and the customer service is excellent.
As I said above, you might consider an alternative like ConvertKit to be more suitable to your needs – especially if you get really deep into automations (affiliate link) – but MailerLite is hardly basic on that front and more than suffices for my needs.
I’m also very comfortable giving MailerLite a general recommendation as it has a pretty stellar free plan too where you don’t pay until you reach 1,000 subscribers. Companies like Mailchimp might sound a better deal but if you look at the small print most of the features are hobbled on their free plan these days.
Plus, Mailchimp has gone this direction recently – not good, and why I left them after eight years. I rather suspect that was a factor in MailerLite doubling in size last year. Oh, Mailchimp…

### Check out this WordPress theme
You need a clean, fast-loading landing page to collect email addresses for your author newsletter. I always recommend WordPress and my current theme – which I cherish, love, and adore – is a custom version of Parallax for Writers by GoCreate.Me which is designed by indie author Caro Bégin – who perfectly understands our specific needs – and does so many nifty little things under the hood.

### Use this service to deliver your magnets
Speaking of nifty, BookFunnel is the best at delivering your reader magnets. Not an affiliate link, just an awesome company which puts authors first and specifically designs its products based on our needs, pain points, and feedback.
Aside from being best-in-class at getting your free ebook onto reader devices (a tricky enough technical challenge), and handling customer service for you (anyone who had a reader magnet several years ago before BookFunnel existed can share their pain!), BookFunnel has lots of cool additional features which I recommend exploring.
Particularly relevant here is that BookFunnel is very flexible and can allow you to set up multiple funnels with different entrypoints with as many different magnets as you like – and it integrates neatly with MailerLite too.

## One last thing…
I hope you enjoyed this post! I just wanted to let you know that I send out exclusive content every Friday to my mailing list subscribers.
I talk about the latest tricks with Facebook Ads or BookBub Ads, I also get into topics like content marketing, reader targeting, and everything else under the sun that pertains to building audience and reaching readers.
By signing up to my list, you get access to the all the old emails too, as well as sneak previews of upcoming books (meaning you get the jump on the latest tricks strategies of everyone else), and exclusive discounts too.
You also get a FREE copy of Following – a book that you can’t get anywhere else! I strongly recommend that you join over ten thousand authors and sign up today because there are all sorts of bonuses you will enjoy.

--------------------------

Content Marketing For Authors • Your Guide
Posted by David Gaughran 7 April 2021. Marketing • 6 Comments.

## The article starts below, but first: FREE STUFF!
Content marketing is something that all authors should be embracing – not least because they are already good at it… and don’t even know it.
A classic authorial flub is beating your readers over the head with all that painstaking research you conducted while suffering from Level IX Procrastination. After going to the trouble of boning up on the mating habits of fruit flies – so your supposedly smart entomologist heroine doesn’t say something truly dumb – there’s a real danger of info dumping or otherwise sucking the drama out of any scene.
Like with so many other literary devices, these bloody things are like saffron: a pinch can transform a dish, but two pinches can ruin it. Meanwhile we authors are backing up the saffron truck and dumping it onto the reader’s driveway.
But what if I told you there’s another use for all these writerly offcuts? Let’s talk about content marketing. *blows alpenhorn*

## Content marketing 101
This is the perfect palette cleanser if you are sick of the overwhelming focus on ads these days, because content marketing is on the other end of the spectrum. It’s also way more natural to the average author and her typical skillset. Making and distributing content is what we do. And the big buzz word in content marketing right now is… wait for it… storytelling.
“I’ve heard of it,” you might respond.
The actual practice of content marketing is quite old, even if the moniker is more modern in nature. And it has become particularly fashionable in the last few years as the focus switched from outbound marketing – where you go out there in the world and try to find customers, often through advertising – to inbound marketing. Which is basically like Field of Dreams: you build something – namely a Bunch O’Content – that organically and passively attracts customers to you instead.
You might think you’re doing that already. And you are. All of you are probably content marketing in some shape or form, even if you don’t slap that particular label on it.
For example, if you run a regular newsletter, you are engaging in content marketing, most likely. If you have more extensive information on your website beyond the usual basic info about you and your books – like if you have a blog or some other informational resource there – then you are probably committing some acts of content marketing even if that wasn’t your explicit intention. Even using a permafree or having a reader magnet can be viewed as a form of content marketing; it only sounds a bit weird because our primary business is also selling content.
Either way, there’s probably a lot more you could be doing with content marketing, especially if you approach it in a little more organized and structured way.
If you are a non-fiction author, content marketing should be a central part of your strategy. But there’s valuable stuff here for fictionauts too. And if you are one of those authors grimacing at the focus these days on advertising, and all the associated costs and complexity, well then get ready to roll up your sleeves: because content marketing is mostly about sweat rather than seed money. And you already know how to do the hardest part: writing good content.

The first recorded example of content marketing is way back in 1732 when Benjamin Franklin published Poor Richard’s Almanack, which was designed to promote his publishing business. The popularity of this as a marketing strategy really grew in the 19th century, and there are lots of examples of things like bookstores opening reading rooms and printing their own newspapers to attract new customers, or publishers releasing magazines where the idea wasn’t to make a profit from the magazine as such but to subtly promote their authors and books, or medical companies printing informational pamphlets for doctors which were genuinely educational and useful but also pushed their products of course.
That last distinction is pretty crucial and an example will tease it out further: John Deere launched its own magazine in 1895 to promote their range of vehicles. Not a catalog, I really must stress. A magazine with actual content that was interesting to people – specifically, its target market, rural farmers and their families. I guess you could think of it like product placement, but where the manufacturers of the product are also making the content in which they are placing things.
Anyway, now content marketing is everywhere, even if we don’t always realize it. For example, the GI Joe comic was revived in the 1980s to promote the new action figure, rather than the action figure being some kind of spin off merchandise.
To give an even more modern example, you might be Googling the best way to clean your Converse and end up on a site like Cleanipedia – which seems like a typical, independent informational site on the internet, but is actually a vehicle for promoting Unilever’s large range of products. It doesn’t mention competing products and only links to Unilever brands, including places where you can buy them. It’s definitely commercial, but it’s not salesy.
It’s also very different from a typical corporate or retailer site promoting or selling a product, because that’s not what this is. It’s a very focused collection of content, designed to bring customers to them passively and over time via SEO, without being in their face. And without costing the kind of money that ads can cost.
It’s also a long-term approach – with all the pros and cons that entails. You can (in theory) flick on ads like a light switch. Content marketing, like that aforementioned Field of Dreams, must be built. Which takes time. And if that part makes you wary – the necessary time investment – that is the right reaction to have. But we’ll talk about some ways you can adopt a more efficient approach in a moment.
On the plus side, the benefits don’t fade away as quickly as a switched-off light either. As long as the content is relatively evergreen, it will keep attracting potential customers, some of whom turn into actual customers. And if you keep adding content (or refreshing it), then the effect becomes cumulative.

## Content marketing For authors
Content marketing is such a huge topic generally that we should drag this corpse back to the literary saloon before it begins to fester.
There are three main channels which authors can use for content marketing: email, your website, and social media. But don’t panic! That doesn’t mean you need to be pumping out Hot Content 24/7 to satisfy three greedy maws. If you are strategic about it, you can take a piece of content and sweat it in multiple ways.
Take the eight-part series of emails I did on BookBub Ads back in 2018, for example. That was the first shot in a content marketing strategy. A lot of this was fleshed out on the fly, but I knew some of what I was doing in advance, and then just layered more stuff on top of it.
The content was My Knowledge of BookBub Ads, to state the obvious, and I started pushing that out occasionally via email. That’s my core audience, and I want them to get the good stuff first, fresh out of the oven. This creates anticipation for a future book, but also acts as a kind of reward as they are getting an exclusive preview.
I have another audience here on this blog/website. While I want to keep a good chunk of stuff exclusive to my list for obvious reasons, I also want to show a bit of leg publicly too. This creates anticipation for a future release too, while also driving sign-ups. And then places like Google will index that (SEO-friendly) post, resulting in some further long-term content marketing benefits over time.
Then there is social media, where I would throw out a morsel or two in the lead-up to publication, designed to create anticipation, drive sign-ups, bring traffic to my site, and/or lead directly to book purchases.
But it’s the same content, being reworked in different ways – some things added, other aspects stripped away. And that’s before you even get to the book, which is obviously the same content, just in a much deeper sense.
The point is you can take a piece of content and work it in different ways depending on your needs and goals, and the inherent strengths of the channel itself (Twitter isn’t a great place to sell a book, but an email isn’t a likely candidate to go viral). This kind of selective recycling massively cuts down on the time invested needed to create whatever content you need.

## Does content marketing work for fiction authors?
I know what you’re thinking: you’re hungry and you want a sandwich. But also, how does this apply to fiction in any way? Good question.
I don’t think it’s necessarily the best use of your time to take this strategy wholesale and simply transpose it to fiction. You can do it, and some people do it well, but the ROI on that time investment often doesn’t look great; you might be better off streamlining it a little.
This really goes back to what is most effective in content marketing: giving people solutions to problems. If someone wants to speak Mandarin, learn the Ukelele, explore vegan cooking, or discover what really happened after Columbus arrived in Hispaniola, they are an easily definable person with a problem. Which needs a solution. And your content is that solution.
With non-fiction, those “problems” also map rather neatly onto products you are selling – i.e. your book, which goes deeper into solving that problem.
That mapping is super tricky with fiction. You can have a blog all about Italian food, and write romances set in Tuscany, but what if I’m Googling how to make handmade pasta, and stumble across your site and love it, but don’t read romance because I’m an empty husk of a person? If you had a book on Italian food culture, or a travel guide to Florence, maybe I would have picked that up, but I’m dead inside and don’t read romance so there’s no chance of making that sale to me.
You often end up losing a lot of people along the way with fiction and blogging, so unless you are going to go big, and have a real passion to blog about your topic anyway, then I wouldn’t recommend starting there.
Email and social media is a different matter. This is where a fiction author can adopt a smart content marketing strategy without losing all their precious book-writing time.

## One last thing…
I hope you enjoyed this post! I just wanted to let you know that I send out exclusive content every Friday to my mailing list subscribers.
I talk about the latest tricks with Facebook Ads or BookBub Ads, I also get into topics like content marketing, reader targeting, and everything else under the sun that pertains to building audience and reaching readers.
By signing up to my list, you get access to the all the old emails too, as well as sneak previews of upcoming books (meaning you get the jump on the latest tricks strategies of everyone else), and exclusive discounts too.
You also get a FREE copy of Following – a book that you can’t get anywhere else! I strongly recommend that you join over ten thousand authors and sign up today because there are all sorts of bonuses you will enjoy.

--------------------------

What The Piña Colada Song Teaches Us About Marketing (Yes, Seriously.)
Posted by David Gaughran 7 April 2021. Marketing • 17 Comments.

## The article starts below, but first: FREE STUFF!
You may love it, you may hate it, but you’ve definitely heard it: The Piña Colada Song is one of the most recognizable and enduring hits of the last fifty years – the only song ever to hit No. 1 in America in two different decades. But it almost sank without trace, and it’s near-failure can teach us a lot about book marketing.
The artist behind it is Rupert Holmes, who is primarily known to many for penning this one tune, but he has led an interesting and varied life. While he currently lives in New York, Holmes was born in Cheshire in 1947 as David Goldstein – a US Army brat, with an American father and an English mother, the wonderfully named Gwendolen.
His was a very musical upbringing, and when the family were uprooted and moved to Nanuet, New York in the 1950s, he ended up attending the prestigious Manhattan School of Music and majored in the clarinet, although he didn’t follow his brother into the world of opera and “serious” music.
Instead, he became a session musician and did side-gigs like writing jingles for shampoo commercials. Holmes was delighted to be working in the music business at any level, but it also enabled him to support himself while working on his own music. In the early 1970s, he had a couple of minor hits under his own name, while also wrote songs for big stars like Dolly Parton, the Drifters, Gene Pitney, and the Partridge Family.
He broke out himself in 1974 with the album Widescreen which really nailed down his soon-to-be-signature style of witty but romantic story songs. And when Barbara Streisand asked to cover some of the songs from that album for her movie A Star Is Born, he’d hit the big time.
It was the release of his fifth solo album – and particularly the single Escape (The Piña Colada Song) – which made him truly famous. At least among those who didn’t mistake the singer for Barry Manilow, a surprisingly persistent error over time.
While that case of mistaken identity didn’t dampen the song’s initial reception, another form did. It was originally released as Escape – with no mention of those famous piña coladas in the song title.
People would call up radio stations and ask for the song about piña coladas, only to be met with bafflement. And when they went to their local record store to order The Piña Colada Song, they were told the store didn’t have it. They did, of course, but it was titled something else: Escape.
Word-of-mouth was hitting an impenetrable wall and sales remained tepid throughout October 1979. The record label begged Rupert Holmes to change the title to The Piña Colada Song, but he resisted the pressure. The theme of escape is central to the whole meaning of the song, he clearly felt, which is all about the protagonist wanted to escape his boring life, and the prospective love interest taking out a personal ad to escape hers.
Rupert Holmes dug his heels in and refused to change the title… right up until December of that year when he finally agreed to a compromise and renamed the song Escape (The Piña Colada Song).
It went straight to No. 1.

## Marketing Lesson #1: a title is part of the commercial packaging – ignore your Inner Artist when it comes to business decisions.
There was another reason for Holmes’ reticence to change the song title. The original version never mentioned piña coladas at all. It’s hard to imagine now, with that chorus tattooed into your brain over decades of radio airplay, but the original line of the chorus was “If you like Humphrey Bogart…” rather than any kind of drink.
Holmes only changed it at the last minute when he thought it didn’t feel right. The piña colada didn’t have any special significance to him, it just happened to be the first cocktail which popped into his head. He later confessed that he didn’t even drink piña coladas.

I kid. I have no idea if Rupert Holmes is sensitive to dairy; I think he just doesn’t like piña coladas. Fans buy them for him all the time, assuming he is as fond of them as his characters are. But at the time of writing the song, he had never even tasted one.
The real reason he changed the line is because of feedback he got when he was running the song by various people. For reasons we’ll get to in a moment, he only had a day or so to nail down the lyrics and when he was on the way to the studio, he read them out for his taxi driver.
What he was specifically seeking opinions on was the infamous twist at the close of the song.
If you’re not familiar with the narrative behind this most famous of story songs, it goes a little like this: a guy in a long-term relationship – presumably married, but that’s not made explicit – is a little… bored with his “woman” and starts perusing the personals. For the millennials in the audience, this was an old-school form of Tinder which took place in a newspaper, where people could take 24 hours or more to swipe right.
Anyway, one of the personal ads catches his eye, one particular lady’s declaration of love for piña coladas and beachy trysts, as well as antipathy for the yoga craze that was also flourishing at the time. Our wannabe cheater responds with similar affectation for piña coladas, expanding this boozy smorgasbord to include champagne, but dismissing the comparative merits of health food. (His views on sandy shagging are unstated but can be safely inferred.)
He offers to meet the mysterious lady tomorrow, at noon, in O’Malley’s Bar, where he says they can plan their escape, and presumably their new life together. The twist – and this is where it gets really weird – is that he walks into the bar and the lady behind the personal ad is… his wife. (Or girlfriend. We never got that fully established. Let’s go with “partner.”)
Either way, they have been together for a while – that’s clear from the start – and neither of them seemed remotely perturbed by the fact they are respectively taking out, and responding to, personal ads looking for extra-curricular activities. They both seem quite blasé and enjoy discovering they have more in common than previously assumed.
The seventies, man; it was a different time.
Holmes wasn’t worried if that twist was bizarre or even palatable – but whether it was too obvious. He sang the song to several people to see if they could see it coming, but obviously they couldn’t because it’s completely crackers.
Another problem emerged during this process though: the line about Humphrey Bogart just didn’t scan well.
It was only in the studio, just before laying down the vocal, that Rupert Holmes decided to change it to the first exotic cocktail he could recall. Time was tight, he was just about to get on the mic, and he didn’t have the luxury of dawdling. Perhaps we should all be glad it wasn’t a Harvey Wallbanger.

## Marketing Lesson #3: Loop in feedback, and bake it right into the product.
If all this wasn’t random enough, Escape wasn’t even originally planned to be single from that album. It was nothing more than a filler track – Holmes needed something up tempo to offset all the ballads and went through a variety of half written songs and melodies, desperately trying to find something that would fit before they ran out of studio time.
The drummer had over-indulged during this lull and had to be put in a taxi home, forcing Holmes to use a primitive form of sampling to lay down the backing track. But it didn’t matter so much, this was just filler, he thought. Even the vocal was done in just one take, as they were running out of time on the final day of recording. Holmes couldn’t summon the energy or enthusiasm for a second attempt.
He was worn out from recording this album, and particularly this final song. As I mentioned previously, he only had a day or so to write the lyrics. He had the melody already, but no words to go with it, and pulled his usual trick of scanning the personal ads in the Village Voice to see if any interesting characters jumped out at him.
One ad did: a woman describing herself in such glowing terms that he sardonically wondered to himself why such a putative catch would need to place a personal ad to get some action. Then he thought he was perhaps being unfair. She might just be looking for adventure, for an escape. He wondered what would happen if he replied…
Boom, the song was born.

## Marketing Lesson #4: hunger is the best sauce and necessity is the mother of invention.
Even after the crazy recording session and the track came together, Holmes didn’t view it as a standout track on the album at all. He considered it “too simple musically and harmonically … it was just supposed to balance out the album.”
And he was surprised when the studio expressed interest in releasing it as the main single, but decided not to fight them on it, if they were so convinced – and they most certainly were.

## Marketing Lesson #5: seek opinions from those with more emotional distance.
Rupert Holmes is sometimes described as a one-hit wonder, which is both unjust and inaccurate – he had several hits before and after the monster success which overshadowed the rest of his pop career, just not to the same crazy level.
And that professional career was just as varied afterwards too. Aside from continuing to write and record music, he was a playwright and novelist and composer. He wrote a TV show and worked on several movies. He won the Tony Awards – twice – for a couple of the many musicals he penned. And he even won the Edgar award for one of the mysteries he wrote, a book called Where The Truth Lies, which was published by Random House and subsequently turned into a movie starring – naturally – Kevin Bacon.
The song was anomalous in some fairly key ways though. As Rupert Holmes said himself, “It’s my most successful song and probably the least typical of my work.” It was an interview in 2003 he gave just after he won the Tony award for his musical The Mystery of Edwin Drood and just before he won the Edgar for his mystery Where the Truth Lies, so he was hardly in a creative rut or sour about it all. He seemed bemused more than anything.
It was never meant to be heard 100 million times; it was meant to be a little short story with a little wink at the end of it, and that was supposed to be it. It was also not supposed to make the piña colada a popular drink in Idaho.
I guess that’s the final marketing lesson here, although it’s more of a life-lesson: you don’t get to decide how people feel about your work. All we can do is keep putting it out there. It becomes its own thing then. In a way, it’s not ours anymore.

## One last thing…
I hope you enjoyed this post! I just wanted to let you know that I send out exclusive content every Friday to my mailing list subscribers with a special focus on book marketing for self-published authors.
I talk about the latest tricks with Facebook Ads or BookBub Ads, I also get into topics like content marketing, reader targeting, and everything else under the sun that pertains to building audience and reaching readers.
By signing up to my list, you get access to the all the old emails too, as well as sneak previews of upcoming books (meaning you get the jump on the latest tricks strategies of everyone else), and exclusive discounts too.
You also get a FREE copy of Following – a book that you can’t get anywhere else! I strongly recommend that you join over ten thousand authors and sign up today because there are all sorts of bonuses you will enjoy.

--------------------------

12 Free Graphic Design Tools For Authors
Posted by David Gaughran 9 February 2023. Resources • 49 Comments.

## The article starts below, but first: FREE STUFF!
Free graphic design tools have had a huge impact on my business. One big change in my approach to self-publishing in the last few years has been recognizing the importance of branding. And doing something about it too, I guess. Because I was always somewhat aware of the role branding plays in marketing but really fell down in the execution.
Which is a nice way of saying my branding was awful.
That’s no slight on the designers who turned out excellent work for me. It was me who didn’t have a coherent vision of how branding should be parlayed across websites and social channels and email. I didn’t even know why that was so important.
These days my site looks more professional. The branding lines up with that of my books, social media, and newsletter. And I’m quite proud of it as I handle all of it myself. Well, almost – I still outsource book covers. But I do the rest. The funniest part is that I’m not remotely artistic in that sense. I couldn’t match colors if you paid me. And can’t draw a straight line with a ruler.
Unsurprisingly, that’s what used to hold me back. I just didn’t have the skills or the confidence to make graphics. Even if I was inclined to hire a designer for every single little job that routinely crops up – and when you start taking this seriously, there are quite a few of those – even throwing money at the problem would have been insufficient.
All that has changed. The tools available to us today are so sophisticated. Even design dullards like me can turn out professional looking graphics… with a little practice, it must be stressed. I didn’t develop phat skillz overnight. This isn’t some kind of one-click wotsit. You will need to invest some time to gain competency here.
Most of those tools are free. Your only excuse for not getting good at this is laziness… which is a pretty valid excuse – just ask my accountant, dietician, or parole officer.
And I’m not just talking about free Photoshop alternatives like Canva. Below we also have handy things like color pickers, color matchers, 3D cover generators, and tools which will crack open a book cover and allow you to pull out any of the layers or elements. Super handy stuff!
This is my branding-slash-design-slash-promo toolkit.

## Canva
Canva
Out of all the Photoshop alternatives, Canva seems to be the most popular among authors, and what I use personally.
Canva is free, powerful, easy-to-use, and browser based too – meaning you can use it on the go. This has been a lifesaver for me when I had sudden need for promo graphics when on the move.
There’s a little bit of a learning curve with Canva, but nothing like Photoshop.
You don’t need training to produce professional-looking graphics with Canva. Just practice. I’m living proof!
Disclosure: these Canva links are affiliate links. But I only found out about Canva’s affiliate program the other day, and have been recommending Canva for years. I think you can safely call my recommendation organic!

To be completely balanced, I have had customer service issues with Canva in the past. I don’t like their policy on paid elements, and they really didn’t react well when I aired those criticisms online. Not a great response, and I was unhappy enough to start looking for Canva alternatives. However those issues have been resolved. Canva made some really welcome changes to how subscriptions work, so it was ultimately a big positive.
For my money, Canva is the best online graphic design tool out there. Cool new features are being added all the time. I like it so much that I spring for the paid version every month.
There’s a more detailed breakdown of Canva Pro at the end of this post.
However, there are some interesting Canva alternatives these days which you might also want to check out.

First up is one designed specifically for authors: Book Brush.
Book Brush seems pretty plugged in to the author community. The team does a lot of outreach and appear at conferences and the like, which means they have some cool author-specific features, like box-set cover generators.
Canva might be slicker and have more features, but fans of Book Brush tell me it is much easier to use for a total beginner, so keep that in mind.
The team also seem to be working hard all the time to launch new features, particularly author-specific ones. For example, the new video effects feature is really cool.
Like Canva, Book Brush has a free version and a paid version with additional features. You can check it out here.
There are other Photoshop alternatives like GIMP, which is free, and online Canva competitors like Stencil, which has free and paid versions. I picked up a lifetime license for Stencil from AppSumo a while back, but bounced off it and just want back to Canva.
My quick take is that Canva is really worth it if you want to invest a little time in getting good at it. That’s what I recommend.
But Book Brush might be more appealing if you want something simpler that might have less of a learning curve. You have options.

## More Free Graphic Design Tools
Moving on from full-on graphic design programs, there are a whole bunch of handy, free tools which help me get the job done.
Coolers.co is a color scheme generator. Basically, you plug in your primary color, and it will suggest a bunch of matching colors for you to use. So simple and incredibly useful. Also has an iOS app and Photoshop integration, if that’s how you roll. I honestly don’t know how I did anything before I discovered this little bit of wizardry.
HTML Color Codes allows you to upload any image and pick out a color. It will give you a hex code for that exact shade and you can just drop that in Canva (or whatever you use) to get that exact color for your design. This has reduced 95% of the faff from my design life.
Tin Eye is the best reverse image search out there, which will help you determine if that image you have your eye on really is available for use. I say “help” deliberately. Be cautious in such things!
PSD Converter will crack open those Photoshop (.psd) files and allow you to extract whatever layer you wish. SO USEFUL.
3D Cover Creator is a pretty slick tool which seems far better than any of the others that I know of, with lots of options. Just download the file as a transparent PNG, and then upload it to Canva, pick your background, and you’ve got yourself a Facebook Ad. (See? Anyone really can do this! See this post for more involved instructions.)
Remove BG – thanks to Maggie Smith in the comments! This is a much better background remover tool than what I had originally recommended, and unlike many of its slick brethren, this is 100% free. Note: if you are a Canva Pro user like me, it now removes backgrounds with one-click ease.
SmallPDF – PDF to JPG converter might not be the most obvious choice here, but I need it for one very specific job: fixing blurry BookBub Ads. Sometimes Canva (and other programs) exports a blurry image at smaller sizes, an issue when it comes to BookBub Ads and the small, 300x250px format. Here’s my workaround: export the image as a Print-Ready PDF in Canva, convert it to a JPG using this tool, then reduce the size to 300x250px. That should kill your blurriness. (Note: I heard that Book Brush may have solved this problem in another way, but I don’t know the details – perhaps a Book Brush user can let us know in the comments).
ImageOptim handily solves a problem that all the above might create. Putting lots of fancy graphics on your website can slow it down, something you don’t want generally, but really, really don’t want for something like your newsletter sign-up page. This useful tool will reduce the size of all of your images to appropriate resolutions for web usage – and as a bonus it’s really quick and easy to use, so you can fly through a whole stack of images in no time. And it really does make a huge difference – see below for proof.

## Canva Pro
Canva Pro
As I said above, Canva is an awesome tool, and the free version will be probably be good enough for most of you.
While you can get very far with regular Canva, combined with all these other free graphic design tools, heavier users might want to spring for Canva Pro – which costs $12.95 a month.
Actually, you can get it for as little as $9.95 a month if you pay annually, but that’s still not nothing, so what do you get for that extra cost?

You can read the full feature set here but these premium features make Canva Pro worth it for me:
- Magic Resizer – don’t tell Canva, but I’d pay just for this alone. Before Magic Resizer waltzed into my life, I would spend a decent amount of time making a nice Facebook graphic. Then I would have to build the whole thing from scratch again to make a BookBub graphic. And then again to make a Facebook Cover photo or whatever else I might need. Now, I click a couple of buttons and my promo image is magically resized into whatever format I want. Wonderful!
- Custom Fonts – the selection of fonts in the free version is quite comprehensive, but that selection grows significantly in Canva Pro. Not only that, you can upload your own custom fonts too, like all these beautiful ones I buy from Set Sail Studios. This helps solve a problem: some don’t realize the importance of establishing their own branding and they will… piggyback on someone else’s. Using a bigger selection of fonts outside the defaults in Canva can prevent a lot of this copying.
- More free elements – the selection of free photos and elements also expands significantly once you switch to the paid version. This also helps prevent some of the copying that can happen BTW.
- Background remover – yes there are nifty free sites which do this anyway, but it’s super handy to be able to do it with one-click without leaving Canva.
- Gifs! – the paid version lets you make gifs but I honestly haven’t tried this yet because I think if I go down that rabbit hole you will never see me again! But one day…
Canva Pro
like all these beautiful ones I buy from Set Sail Studios

## Your Favorite Free Graphic Design Tool?
What about you? Do you use any of these free graphic design tools? Any others you recommend? Let us know in the comments!
And if this bag of tools has whetted your appetite for more, then check out my monster guide to book cover design.

--------------------------

The Combined Book Exhibit Scam
Posted by David Gaughran 13 April 2021. Bewares, Publishing • 34 Comments.

The Combined Book Exhibit has been taking its traveling bookshelf, packed with hopeful authors’ books, to trade events and book fairs around the world for 85 years. But while it may have started as a vehicle for genuine publishers and authors to showcase their wares at far-flung events, today it is notorious for enabling a very particular kind of author scam.
If an author approaches the Combined Book Exhibit directly via its website, they can display their ebook or print book at prestigious events like the London Book Fair or BookExpo America for $325. This is a considerable fee when you consider what the author gets in return, especially if you have seen these tired, unloved bookcases at industry events. The idea that an agent or editor or movie producer would peruse these shelves, let alone actually acquire something from them, is risible.
Package deals are also flogged to authors. For example, to have your print and ebook edition displayed in the New Title Showcase at the London Book Fair and BookExpo America next year costs the considerable sum of $900. And then something called the 2020 International Package will take your hopefully sturdy paperback to the London Book Fair, BookExpo America, Beijing Book Fair, Frankfurt Book Fair, Sharjah Book Fair, and the Guadalajara Book Fair, at a cost of $1400 or $1650 if you want to include the ebook also.
Needless to say, this is quite a lot of money for some rather questionable return. And when you sign up for one of the smaller packages you are quite strongly pushed towards the more expensive ones – indeed, the individual shows are hidden away behind a button. Even if you do discover it, and select the 2019 Frankfurt Book Fair, for example, at a cost of $400, additional services are pushed: Ads in Exhibit Catalogues for $150-$350, Autographing slots for $695. All of which the author will struggle to get any kind of return on whatsoever.
Of course, the Combined Book Exhibit has been hawking these questionable products with the full-throated support of the publishing industry. It has endless partnerships and is pretty much protected from any criticism.
However, some criticism has pierced that bubble. One of the Combined Book Exhibit’s most controversial practices doesn’t just involve hawking overpriced services of questionable quality, but reselling those services to exploitative vanity presses who then go on to add an incredible mark-up on top of these already high prices. Of course, these vanity presses tend to adopt the hard-sell, making outrageous promises regarding what these services can achieve.
Writer Beware has written multiple times about the plague of vanity presses coming from the Philippines right now, mostly inspired by Author Solutions, often directly set up by Author Solutions alumni. There are so many of these companies now that Victoria Strauss needed two separate posts to detail them all (Part 1, Part 2).
The key lesson these vanity presses learned from Author Solutions was that you can adopt an instant veneer of respectability by partnering with well-known companies at the heart of the traditional publishing business. Author Solutions infamously did this with HarperCollins/Thomas Nelson, Harlequin, Writers Digest, Hay House, Simon & Schuster, Lulu, Barnes & Noble – even the bloody Authors Guild – before netting itself the big kahuna: getting purchased by Penguin. (All that really happened right? It wasn’t just a crazy dream?)
The Author Solutions copycats since found a much easier way to get that fig-leaf of legitimacy: just purchase packages from Combined Book Exhibit for the purposes of re-selling, and then offer services to authors promising to “take their book to the London Book Fair.”

These vanity press copycats are now cold-calling authors, often rerouting their number via the USA, and deploying the language skills they learned on the job at Author Solutions, under Penguin’s tutelage.
The situation has gotten so bad that Combined Book Exhibit themselves have issued a warning on their own site about these scams. And, really, this was a huge surprise to me because, a few years ago, when I asked the Combined Book Exhibit about their policies surrounding the reselling of their packages to companies applying huge mark-ups, they responded by… blocking me on Twitter.
While I commend the Combined Book Exhibit for warning against specific companies on their site – including companies that have been aggressively cold-calling authors like Books Magnet and Capstone – and detailing red-flag practices too, I can’t help wonder about a couple of things.
First, if Combined Book Exhibit was truly worried about this scam and these companies, it could stop it tomorrow by stopping the reselling of its products to these companies. Why continue to do business with companies that you yourself have labelled scammers? Why would they continue to allow the reselling of your products for, in their own words, “exorbitant rates upwards of $1,800.”? If you stop selling them your display case slots, they have nothing to re-sell. Problem solved… if you really want that. Otherwise this looks like a giant ass-covering exercise.
Second, and rather more pertinently, there are very obvious omissions from this list of problematic companies. The reselling of Combined Book Exhibit products is not limited to some fly-by-night operations out of the Philippines. These book display packages are resold, often at crazy mark-ups, often in very aggressive and disingenuous ways, by a whole host of self-publishing service companies, vanity presses, and “hybrid” publishers.
I can only speculate about why the Combined Book Exhibit chose not to include Lulu on its list. Here they are selling another book display package of seriously questionable value at $1,799 – just a dollar shy of the “exorbitant” level warned about by Combined Book Exhibit.
Another curious omission is AuthorHouse – especially given that AuthorHouse is considerably larger than any of the called-out companies. It’s also charging significantly more than that “exorbitant” figure of $1,800 which Combined Book Exhibit specifically called out. Here’s one such AuthorHouse package for the quite frankly bonkers sum of $2,699.
Even stranger again is the omission of Partridge Publishing, a vanity press based in India and Singapore and South Africa which is charging the barely credible price of 197,599 rupees – approximately $2,800.
And I know Combined Book Exhibit is aware of these packages and their pricing because it was this was what I was querying when they blocked me.
These style of packages were also previously offered by Simon & Schuster-owned vanity press Archway, HarperCollins-owned Westbow, (formerly) Writers Digest-owned Abbott Press, Hay House-owned Balboa.
What do all these companies have in common, aside from some rather famous names which presumably inure them from criticism? All of these companies are actually operated on the ground by Author Solutions. Yes, even Partridge Publishing, which is still owned by Penguin Random House BTW, is operated on their behalf by Author Solutions.
Which means Combined Book Exhibit must be doing a hell of a lot of business with Author Solutions every year. If only there was a way they could prevent all this price-gouging, right? The very price-gouging which they themselves call a “scam” on their own website? If only.
There are all sorts of scammers and weasels in publishing. And partnering with known and trusted entities is how they dupe authors in such huge numbers, particularly inexperienced authors, very young authors, or those of more advanced years – who make up the overwhelming majority of victims.
We are supposed to be able to trust famous names like Penguin and the London Book Fair. They aren’t supposed to act as fig leaves for industrial-scale author exploitation.

## The article starts below, but first: FREE STUFF!
Keep in mind that the Combined Book Exhibit isn’t an unknown entity operating at the margins of the publishing industry, it is right at the heart of the traditional end of the business, with long-standing partnerships with the most prestigious industry events and deep links with the likes of Publishers Weekly and some writing organizations too (who should know better).
Unlike many author scams, this one actually has a pretty simple solution. Combined Book Exhibit could review its reselling policies, it could stop all this tomorrow, but it most likely won’t – I suspect Author Solutions is a huge chunk of its yearly income.
Which means the onus is on those partnering with the Combined Book Exhibit. Will you continue to play your own part in this operation? Or will you use your influence to make it right?
The choice is yours.

--------------------------

The Black Hat Riddle
Posted by David Gaughran 30 January 2021. Bewares • 117 Comments.

There are serious problems in publishing right now with black hat authors. Nobody is talking about it either, because the cost of speaking out is simply too great. Scammers are increasingly litigious. Dirty tricks abound. White hat writers are suffering in other ways too as readers come to mistrust any name unknown to them, and the only entity with enough power to enforce any kind of justice doesn’t like going on patrol. But maybe there is something else we can do.
My first introduction to the concept of black hats and white hats was not via cowboy movies – I am not American and my own cultural milieu was less focused on that… frontier – but from Philosophy classes as a college student. Particularly what is known as the Hat Riddle (or the Prisoner Hat Riddle).
There are many variations, but in the version I heard, four cowboys – two wearing black hats and two wearing white hats – are captured by banditos who decide to have a little fun with them. They bury the cowboys up to their necks in sand so they can’t move or even turn their heads. The banditos swap their hats around so each cowboy doesn’t know which color hat they are wearing. And then they are asked to guess… and if they get it wrong, they die.
The cowboys are arranged in the manner displayed in the picture at the top of this blog post. No one can see their own hat, of course. The first man, wearing a black hat, is behind a wall and can see none of his companions.
The next in line, on the other side of the wall and wearing a white hat, can only see the two men in front of him and their respective hat colors. The third man, wearing a black hat, can only see the cowboy in front of him. And then the final cowboy can see none of his friends or their hat colors, or indeed his own.
The cowboys have ten minutes to figure it out, or they will be executed. Communication between them is not permitted, and if they attempt it, they will be shot. But if any of the cowboys guesses the color of his own hat correctly, he will save them all.
After just one minute in the searing hypothetical heat, one of the cowboys calls out the color of his hat. Correctly. The riddle is this – and it’s not a trick question – which one of them calls out, and why is he 100% sure of the color of his hat?
The answer – and the logic – is in the comments, and it requires a bit of lateral thinking. Just like the problem we are all facing in the Kindle Store today.

People have noticed that I’ve become increasingly vague when talking about those in our community wearing black hats. I haven’t blogged about the topic since last October. I occasionally try and give out warnings on Facebook and Twitter, but often people are frustrated by vague warnings and want all the particulars – and I just can’t give them. I won’t get into the particular details of why, but let’s just say that the personal cost of speaking out on these topics is far greater than anybody knows.
However, perhaps there is something else I can do, something we can all do, to fight those who cheat and swindle their way to the top. We don’t necessarily have to confront the black hats directly – perhaps we can lift up all those with white hats instead.
Wouldn’t it be great if we could create a network of authors with similar values? I mean those who don’t engage in unethical behavior to game the charts. Those who actually care about the quality of the books they publish, and don’t use any tricks to cheat readers or retailers or bestseller charts.
Good people, if you want shorthand.
What if there was a way that good people could promote each other? Instead of tearing down the scammers and slimeballs, we could just… leapfrog them. Don’t invite them to our promos. Shut them out of our networks. Instead, only loop in those who respect the craft, the work, the business, and each other.
I’ve been thinking about this all weekend, while at a conference in America. It was a wonderful event with some really superb sessions which got the brain whirring. I won’t drop any names here as I rather deliberately don’t want to associate anyone with the views I’m expressing in case they attract any heat, but you can see me raving on Twitter about the event and all the things which impressed me.
During the many long discussions I had with fellow authors and industry people last week, a recurring topic was where the industry was headed, of course. Again, not associating anyone else with my opinion – I want to be clear on that – but my personal view is that the problems posed by unethical individuals and entities and groups are growing, not abating, and that there is real danger here because we are talking about it less. Publicly, at least.
Scamming and cheating hasn’t stopped just because fewer people are speaking about it – in many ways it is worse than ever, but the dangers of highlighting it today are such that many voices have retreated from the discussion. I’m not criticizing anyone who that applies to; it also applies to me, quite frankly. There are so many things going on right now that I would love to be explicit about, because there are really dangerous currents going on under the surface, and some particularly nasty people operating, worse than those that have come before, engaging in even more insidious practices.
And the community can’t police itself like it used to.
I don’t know how all this will pan out. To really combat all this stuff, you would need the world’s biggest retailer to actually care what is happening to its store. You would need some superpowered version of the watchdogs of before, with endless legal funds and reserves of energy – a full time staff with a panel of technical experts who understood how all the ad platforms and algorithms worked, so they could grapple with the incredibly complex scams that are operating right now. And you would need institutional support to handle the cyber-security (and actual security) implications of taking on people who routinely employ clickfarms and bots and hackers, people who think nothing of issuing legal threats (or other kinds of threats).
Which is not going to happen, of course. This isn’t to criticize any entities or individuals that have sacrificed a lot over the last few years, and decades, to protect authors from various scams. I think they deserve a tremendous amount of gratitude from the community.
But the simple fact is that the scams have now exponentially exploded in technical complexity, and those wearing black hats are much more ruthless; they have deeper pockets, more to protect.

So, what do we do? Nothing? I’m not prepared to go there yet. There are still little bits of activism we can all engage in, if this is something we truly care about. We can still bend the ear of retailers in private, about certain things they are doing… or not doing – and not accept the usual corporate blandishments. We can join one of the organizations that does actually fight for authors. And maybe we can lift up the good people and use what little power we have to exclude the bad people a little more.
You don’t have to do any or all of these things. I’m not an organization person, for example, although I do amplify their campaigns when I can. But is lifting up good people and steering clear of bad people something else we can all consider?
I’ve turned down more than a few opportunities in the last 12 months, when I decided to draw a line in the sand. I’ve turned down attractive speaking gigs when I saw who was on the slate. I’ve withdrawn from lucrative promos when I saw who else was on board and what practices might be deployed. And I’ve started telling organizers why I was withdrawing too, instead of citing scheduling conflicts, or whatever I used to do.
It’s not easy, and it certainly doesn’t make you popular. I’m not looking for any prizes here, just showing how you can – maybe – use whatever power you have to get people thinking about what kind of industry we want to have. What kind of behaviors we want to reward.
Events and promos are starting to realize that I won’t participate if certain people are involved, or if certain practices are engaged in. And this doesn’t make me unique or different – authors have been doing this for a long time and have made far bigger sacrifices. I’ve just started being explicit. At least in private.
These are things you can do too. I’m not saying you have to agree with everything I say, or share my specific values, or even particularly like me. But you can – I respectfully suggest – make a small step towards having the kind of industry you want by taking a similar stance.
Or at least thinking about it.
Maybe it doesn’t suit. Perhaps I’m in a more privileged position here and have the luxury of turning things down. That’s a fair criticism, and I’ll accept that. But consider the following, if you can.
What about doing something positive for the people who do enshrine your values? What about only choosing authors to list-swap with who are good people who truly care about the books which carry their name?
What about only inviting people into your box set who are nice people who don’t cross the line when it comes to reaching readers and making money? I know it’s tempting to invite the person with the 40,000-strong mailing list, or massive Facebook presence, or whatever. I know, because I’ve succumbed to that temptation before. I’ve participated in things which I regret, promoted with people I wished I hadn’t, gone to events where, in hindsight, I wished I had pushed back on certain practices, or at least called them out privately.
I also know that other people have been doing this kind of thing for a long time. I’m not claiming any of this is new, or that this makes me in any way special; I’m just trying to get more people to think about doing the same thing. Because I think the industry needs to change course. And maybe we – collectively – have the power to help ourselves if no one else is going to help us.
We all have mailing lists and Facebook Likes and passionate readers. We can combine our networks to lift up the right people. And we can avoid succumbing to the temptation to include that questionable person because they’ll make us a ton more money.
I waited until my recent promo was over so there could be no accusations of some kind of self-serving weaselry, but I think a concrete example is useful.
Because I was going to a con last weekend and giving a couple of talks on marketing, I wanted some live examples of cross-promotion. I had been meaning to do a group promo with a bunch of fellow authors for a while and decided to pull something together quickly in time for the weekend. It was also the only window where certain people could participate; I had strong feelings about the kind of person I wanted to include.

## Creative Solutions for Black Hat Authors
I personally wanted authors who were strong on craft and ethical in their approach to marketing. I wanted good people. Books and authors who I could comfortably stand behind, and not worry how they were pushing the promo.
Now, the list of writers I included isn’t proscriptive, of course. I’m not saying these are the only ethical people in the business and everyone else is a black hat author – just in case anyone misinterprets this. I plan to do more promos of one kind of another, and I want to cross-promote with as many good people as possible, people who care about their books, and their fellow authors. Ethical people.
I think there’s a hole in the market here. The community really responded to this approach in huge numbers. I don’t have the final tally, but my estimate is that this promo shifted at least 15,000 books. And the only spend was around $600 of affiliate income rolled back into ads, with a little extra from me. We had no retailer support – there was no time to pull anything like that together – no discount sites, no advance buzz, no elaborate social media campaigns. Just our respective lists and platforms and networks.
And a ton of sharing from participants and writers in general (thank you, btw). There was no buy-in for participants, and no hassle. A genuine win for everyone.
All this got me thinking: wouldn’t it be great if we could do this all the time? I don’t mean cross-promote, that’s old hat, but exclusively focus on lifting up good people and skipping over those who engage in tawdry practices.
We might not be able to end scammers and ban black hats, we might not be able to confront the sleazy internet marketer types directly, but maybe we could stop inviting them to our parties? Maybe we could stop exposing our audiences to these people?
This is but a simple request: think about it. Maybe it’s worth a try.

--------------------------

Innovation and The Audiobook Market
Posted by David Gaughran 30 January 2021. Publishing • 12 Comments.

## The article starts below, but first: FREE STUFF!
When I was at NINC in 2018, I was telling my mailing list that all the exciting developments in the audiobook market are coming from outside Amazon – companies like Findaway, Kobo, Chirp/BookBub, and various others serving the library market as well.
This is a most welcome development because it also feels like many of the moves (Amazon-owned) Audible has been making lately have been quite negative: the royalty cut, the new subscription service and its low pay rates, and Amazon’s controversial and brazen move to start captioning audiobooks without compensating publishers and authors – which resulted in an immediate lawsuit from the Big 5.
Those large publishers have themselves been making no friends with libraries recently, offering ever-worsening terms for audiobooks, to match those for ebooks. Which is an opportunity for indies, of course, especially those using companies like Findaway to better serve that market.

## The Audiobook Market & Indies
But what really excites me is the dynamic in audiobook publishing that is the complete opposite of that which upended the ebook market. In the same way that Amazon gave indies a level playing field, and pricing control, and let them do their thang, the non-Amazon entities in this space have adopted that strategy while Audible resolutely goes in the other direction.
Companies like Findaway and Kobo and Chirp realized something very important: if you let indies actually market their audiobooks (especially by giving them pricing control), they can bring you lots of new customers. We’re growing the pie, and everyone is benefiting – not least us.
(Unless you are tied to ACX/Audible right now, of course, which is the situation with one of my titles; I’m counting down until I get those rights back…)
I spoke with my list about various audio experiments I will be engaging in the future and the first of those was the audiobook edition of Strangers to Superfans – which you can check out here.
This audiobook is produced and distributed by Findaway Voices – a company I’ll be talking a lot more soon, because they have a very different approach to production and distribution.
But just to give you a taste of how much broader your distribution will be with Findaway, check out this list of retailers and library services where Superfans will be available:
Amazon, Audible, Apple, Nook Audiobooks, Kobo, Audiobooks.com, Google Play, Scribd, Biblioteca, Chirp, Walmart, Hibooks, Hoopla, Storytel, OverDrive, Playster, Baker & Taylor, Beek, Downpour, Ebsco, eStories, Follett, Hummingbird, Instaread, Libro.fm, Mlol, Nextory, 3Leaf Group, 24Symbols, Odilo, Permabound, and Wheelers.
That’s not even a complete list, there will be more coming very soon too. And notice that Amazon and Audible are on that list – being with Findaway doesn’t keep you out of any of the major stores, including Audible. Just to knock another myth on its head: it also doesn’t stop your Findaway-distributed title getting Whispersynced on Amazon either.
Having pricing control is exciting. The ability to run discounts will allow indies to truly market their audiobooks for the first time – some are even experimenting through various storefronts with perma-free series openers. It’s a really exciting time, and I’ll have lots more on this topic soon.
For now, check out the Superfans audiobook here. It’s narrated by Melinda Wade, who was just wonderful to work with, and I’ll speak more about that process in future posts.

--------------------------

Email Marketing: Your Secret Weapon
Posted by David Gaughran 1 January 2026. Marketing • 230 Comments.

Email marketing is the most powerful tool at your disposal and not taking advantage of its unique benefits is really missing a trick. Here’s why.
I’m sure all of you know the power of having thousands of committed readers signed up to your mailing list, allowing you to send each new release into the charts. Even if you’re not there yet personally, this should be something you are aiming for. Every single author should have a mailing list and be seeking to actively grow it.

But before we fly through the basics and delve into more advanced topics, let’s be clear about something: email marketing is not about spam. It’s not about fake intimacy. It’s not about posing BS questions to create false engagement. And it’s not about bait-and-switches, contrived urgency, click-baiting subject lines, or other emotional tricks; that’s what cheesy internet marketers do.
It’s a huge mistake to look at someone doing email marketing in a slimy way and decide that email isn’t for you. There’s a right way and a wrong way to use every tool.

## Email Marketing Basics
I recommend MailerLite (affiliate link) for the job, which is free for the first 1,000 subscribers and reasonably priced thereafter, has an intuitive drag-and-drop interface for creating pretty emails, enables you to slice-and-dice your lists whichever way you please, gives you a nice clean and clear interface, offers great customer service, and allows surprisingly powerful automations.
(Note: I switched to MailerLite from Mailchimp, for reasons detailed in this post – Time To Ditch Mailchimp? – which also recommends MailerLite alternatives for those with specific needs).
Also make sure to have an enticing call-to-action right at the end of all your books, pointing people towards a clean sign-up page on your website, so that you can capture as many of those readers as possible who were delighted with your story.
Okay. This is just the bare minimum reader-capturing apparatus that you should have in place, preferably with some form of welcome sequence too.
Writing good books, releasing as frequently as you can manage, and growing your list over time organically will get you going. But email marketing can do so much more for you than simply roll out launch announcements.

## Reader Retention via Email
As authors, we have various techniques aimed at getting people to check out our work, whether that’s engaging in price promotions, giving our work away for free, buying a spot on various reader sites, advertising on Amazon, Facebook and BookBub, engaging in cross-promotions with other writers, beefing our review count by giving away ARCs – the list of such tactics is endless, and the amount of time and money and headspace we devote to these activities is considerable.
But you know what’s way easier than gaining a new customer? Keeping an old one.
In my book Strangers to Superfans (links to all retailers here) I break down the five stages that your Ideal Reader goes through in the transformation from stranger to superfan. And the various blockages along the way that can impede that process.
One of the biggest blockages is internal. Which is a diplomatic way of saying one of the biggest problems is you.

Aside from assuming discoverability is our biggest challenge – and mistakenly devoting all our energy and focus into getting discovered – we also assume our job is done once the reader clicks the Buy button. Our prose will sweep them away. That rakish duke will make them swoon. And the battle-scarred captain will inspire enough loyalty among our reader-crew to get them through all ten books of our tentpole series. Right? Wrong.
Like all relationships, the relationship with your readers must be nurtured. Otherwise you will lose many along the way. We can’t be so arrogant to assume that we will instantly everyone’s favorite author overnight.
Remember that some readers get through a book a week. Retired readers can get through several! All those authors will be jockeying for position in the reader’s consciousness.
Whose work do you think they are more likely to read again? The author who releases the next book in the series five months later and hopes that Amazon recommends it to them? Or the author who convinces the reader to sign up to their mailing list?
Even out of those already working the mailing list angle, which writer is our hypothetical reader more likely to remember: one who doesn’t contact them again until the launch of the next book five months later? Or one who stays in touch regularly, building up a relationship by emailing them something of value (i.e. of genuine interest) every month or so?
There’s no contest. You can take any of those approaches; it’s your choice. But not having a refined email marketing strategy makes it much harder for you to retain readers. Which is a shame considering all the sweat expended getting them to buy those books you labored over.

## Advanced Email Marketing
It’s not just with retaining readers where email marketing really shines. Your email list has all sorts of uses:
- deepening engagement and relationships (creating superfans)
- launching books into the stratosphere by concentrating sales during launch week
- driving sales of backlist books your readers may have missed
- boosting reviews by drawing from a pool of your most committed fans. 
Some authors use their list to have a true back-and-forth with their readers – not the kind of fake engagement you see internet marketer types deploy. I know authors who have drawn from their subscriber list for beta readers. Others (me included!) have used their regular emails to flesh out book ideas – their list becoming a sounding board of sorts. More again rave about the having an open, direct channel with their readership, the psychological benefits of which should never be understated in what is largely a solitary profession.
But there’s more! Certain email strategies can help you gain readers too. Dangling something as a sign-up bonus is a very powerful way to drive sign-ups. Often referred to as a “cookie” or “reader magnet” it usually takes the form of a free book or story – but doesn’t need to. Writers can get very creative with this sign-up bonus and really tie it in to the universe of their books.
These books or bonuses – especially when exclusive – can be enticing enough to draw in new readers as well as existing fans, and then if you really are delivering value with your regular emails, and not just squeezing your list for sales, then you have a great chance of converting these “cold” readers into buyers and fans too.
I see it happen all the time: someone signs up to my list because they want the bonus book – you can’t get it anywhere else for all the money in the world. They hang around for a few weeks, seeing if the emails have any value to them. I make sure that any “ask” in my emails only comes after a succession of “gives.” And twhey might get several emails of genuine value before I push my work. Avoiding the hard sell can bring better results.

## Unique Advantages of Email
“But wait!” you might cry, just as I was getting up to speed, “Why does all this have to be done by email? Don’t people use Facebook to talk to fans? Isn’t it better to put all this content out on social media or a blog where it actually has a chance of going viral?”
Fair points. So, let’s look at the unique advantages of email. Why is email the best tool for the job? What does it have over blogging or Facebook or anything else? These are good questions and worth teasing out.

### Ownership
That might be your name on your Facebook wall but you don’t own it. As you soon find out when you have to pay to make sure your Likes see your launch announcement. Or when you get thrown in Facebook jail by an errant AI.

### Attention
Email converts like crazy. Nothing comes close to it. Compare the percentages on a Facebook or Amazon Ad versus an email to your list. Or to a lucrative BookBub Featured Deal. (Which are email blasts, lest you forget!).
When you are reading an email, you are far less distractable. Social media or any other web page can’t compare. Because email captures attention. Email converts.

### Intimacy
Perhaps a by-product of the above, email is far more intimate. Maybe also down to the feeling that this is two-way communication. It feels like someone talking to you, rather than broadcasting to you via a blog or social media post. (And sometimes it really is two-way communication because an actual dialogue occurs.)

### Data
I know who is opening my emails, who is clicking on the links, and who is ignoring them completely. But I have no idea with my blog subscribers. I just get aggregated states on views and visits and link clicks. Facebook gives me data morsels here and there, but, again, only aggregated. I don’t know who are the solid core which see all my posts organically before I drop a dime (I don’t even know if it’s the same people, or different tranche each time). With email, I have all that data at my fingertips, well presented, and easily searchable. Digestible too – which is pretty important. I look at Google Analytics and I just want to close the window right away (and usually do). All this is important because…

### Flexibility
Even if I did know who was missing my Facebook post, I wouldn’t be able to do much about it. But with email I can use segmentation. I can identify people who don’t open 5 or 10 emails in a row and try to re-engage them. Or cut them loose if they are irretrievable, keeping my costs down. But on Facebook, as I said in Strangers to Superfans:
those now-uninterested Likes keep accumulating like mercury in the body.”
This drives up your costs. It makes your content look unengaging to Facebook’s system. And it makes it harder for you to reach those who are interested.

### Portability
If Twitter pulls a MySpace, all those followers I’ve accrued will disappear too. But when Mailchimp jacked up its prices, I was able to take my carefully cultivated mailing lists and move over to MailerLite. (The process was pretty straightforward, as detailed in my post Moving from Mailchimp toMailerLite.) But if Facebook runs into trouble and jacks up its prices, it will be a million times messier for you because you don’t own your Facebook Page. All your Likes you built up will be lost in time, like tears in the rain.

## The Right Tool for the Job
It’s important to remember that it’s not either/or. As you may have noticed, this piece of content is coming to you from a blog. I also have a Facebook Page – indeed you may have seen this post on social media first and then clicked through to my blog. And I have an email list, of course.
All these different tools can achieve different things. A really slick content marketing strategy involves knowing what type of content should go out via what channel and in which form. Because all of these channels can act in symbiosis, and cross-pollinate each other.
(BTW, if you’re interested in learning more about content marketing generally, I’m covering the topic in a series of emails to my list at the moment, and by signing up here, you get access to the Email Archive and any episodes you missed.)
All this talk of content marketing strategies might be overwhelming for some, but take it step by step. Make sure to prioritize so that you aren’t spread to thin. And you don’t have to do all of it – this really must be stressed. An involved content marketing strategy is going to be much more important for a non-fiction author, for example.
Your priority, though, should be your email list, along with a website so there is a clean and slick place for readers to sign up. If you were only going to focus on one thing in the whole world of content marketing and email marketing make it that you will regularly email your readers – once a month is perfectly fine!
The unique advantages of email mean this is a tool you really shouldn’t ignore. Yes, you could use Facebook for customer retention. Yes, you could rely solely on advertising to get you new customers and to tell existing ones about new releases. But email is just so much better at customer retention and can save you so much money in advertising… if you do it right.

## Authenticity or Bust
Doing it right starts with respecting your readers. Making sure you stay in touch with them regularly. (But only emailing them with something that has genuine value.) Make sure that any “ask” is surrounded by a string of “gives.” And by “ask” I mean any time you want something . Whether that’s a sale or a share or a review.
You might think you are doing readers a favor by not bothering them unless you have a new book. But what you are really doing is only turning up at their door when you want money from them. I made this mistake for years. It was only when I tried a different approach, that I could see the benefits of regular contact.
If you want help with any of this stuff, if you want to do email right, check out Newsletter Ninja. It’s the best book on the topic and changed my whole approach.
And whatever your approach to email is, don’t listen to anyone who tells you that email marketing doesn’t work just because spammers are a thing. That’s an incredibly limited view, one that could end up limiting your own potential.

## Get More Help
I send out exclusive content every Friday to my mailing list subscribers. We get deep into the topic of email for authors, as well as the latest tricks with Facebook Ads or BookBub Ads. I also cover content marketing, reader targeting, and everything else under the sun that pertains to building audience and reaching readers.
By signing up to my list, you get access to the all the old emails too, as well as sneak previews of upcoming books (meaning you get the jump on the latest tricks strategies of everyone else), and exclusive discounts too.
You also get a FREE copy of Following – a book that you can’t get anywhere else! I strongly recommend that you join over ten thousand authors and sign up today because there are all sorts of bonuses you will enjoy.

--------------------------

Coming Soon: Big Facebook Ads Changes
Posted by David Gaughran 17 May 2021. Marketing, Resources • 11 Comments.

## The article starts below, but first: FREE STUFF!
There is a big change coming to Facebook Ads which could have a profound effect on the performance of all new and existing campaigns from next month onward. You need to start getting your head around this now as the change is quite unpopular and the workarounds are all a bit… fiddly.
The new feature Facebook is rolling out is called Campaign Budget Optimization. You might have seen it in your account already. It’s billed as a quality-of-life improvement, allowing you to simply nominate a budget for the campaign – and then hand the reins over to Facebook’s friendly neighborhood AI, which will determine how it should be spent. And if you like the sound of that, you trust Facebook’s system a lot more than me.
Campaign Budget Optimization has been available as an optional feature for several months now so lots of people have been experimenting with it and sharing data – which we’ll get to. The big change is this: from next month, it will start being compulsory.*
*Note: see the update at the bottom of the post. It appears this change will only start being compulsory next month for some users and others may be spared for a few months. Read on for more!
To explain why this is such a big deal, and why it will particularly affect authors, first we must quickly go over the basic structure of a Facebook campaign and how things work right now (experienced users can skip to the next section).

## Facebook Ads – Campaign Structure
Facebook Ads have a three-level structure, much like Google Ads: Campaigns, Ads Sets, and the Ads themselves. The last level is the only thing that users see, and the other two levels are basically settings behind the curtain for advertisers, if you like. It breaks down like this:
The Campaign level is all about what kind of ad it is: Traffic (this is what you select when running a bog standard ad to your Amazon listing, for example), Leadgen (designed to boost your mailing list), or other types of ads like Awareness, and Video Views.
The Ad Set level is where you fiddle with all the primary settings for your ads like budget (how much you are spending), schedule, audience (who sees them), and placement (where your ads turn up).
The Ad level is the public face: the image, the link you are sending people to, the accompanying ad text.
Taking the picture above as our example, I might have a Campaign pushing a new release on Amazon, and then I might have one Ad Set targeting my mailing list, another targeting those who have Liked my Facebook Page, a third hitting a bunch of comp authors, and a fourth re-targeting anyone who has visited my website in the last six months. And then I might have two alternate Ad images inside each of those Ad Sets to see which my readers respond to best. That’s not the only way to structure a campaign, of course, but a fairly common one.

As you have just seen, budgets are currently set at the Ad Set level. But soon you will only be able to set budgets the Campaign level. Why is this change being made? And what difference does it make?
Facebook is deploying more and more machine learning these days, aiming to simplify the platform to draw in more advertisers and to also cut through some of the ever-growing complexity around Facebook Ads. Or if you want to be a little less kind, they are dumbing down the system… whether you like it or not.
You can already see this machine learning being deployed with split tests – either the formal Facebook feature which runs split tests for you, or the more manual ones you can just run yourself (i.e. like the example above where you put two alternate images in the same Ad Set). If you have done any split tests like this on Facebook, you will have seen the system actively monitor the results and give priority to the better performing ad out of the pair without you having to do that proactively.
Now Facebook wants to do that with budgets. And it’s more than a little controversial.
Instead of setting your budget at the Ad Set level, and assigning a separate budget of your choice for each of those Ad Sets, you will now set your budget at the Campaign level and the system will decide how to split it among your ad sets, based on performance.
In fact, you already have this option. What’s controversial is that from September this will start becoming compulsory.
The reason that experienced Facebook advertisers are unhappy with this change is twofold:
- It removes control. We know what budgets we want to spend where and don’t need “help.” Particularly because…
- To be blunt, the system isn’t as smart as billed. And doesn’t have a rather crucial bit of context: knowledge of your particular business needs.

## Facebook Changes – Case Studies
Let’s say I’m a Kindle Unlimited author running a Countdown Deal on Amazon UK and Amazon US, and I want to spend $30 a day in the UK on my Facebook Ads, and $120 a day in the US, pushing both deals over the full seven days. Under the current systems, I can assign the respective budgets exactly like that and don’t have to worry about it further.
Under the new system, if Facebook sees that my UK ads are performing better – for example if they have a 4.2% CTR versus a 2.6% CTR on my US ads – it might start spending the majority of my budget in the UK. But I don’t want to do that because Kindle Store visibility is worth much more in the far larger market of America.
Another example should underline the problem.
Suppose I’m a wide author of bestselling military romances (a gal can dream…). With the current system, I can have one Ad Set targeting Amazon US, pushing my permafree Book 1, chewing through a $40 a day budget. And then have three more ads targeting American users of Apple Books, Nook, and Kobo with budgets of $5-$10 a day.
Again, I don’t want to spend more than $10 a day targeting Nook readers, or less than $40 a day targeting Amazon customers, because a sale on Amazon is simply worth more to me, as visibility in the much larger Amazon store is more valuable by several factors.
But Facebook’s new system might see the more deal-starved Nook reader responding with slightly more engagement on those ads and start shifting over some of that Amazon budget. This could cause me to fall off the front page of the charts on Amazon, and have a real knock-on effect on overall income, and Nook simply can’t make up the shortfall.
The point is that I know my business and my priorities. Facebook doesn’t – and can’t know that, no matter how many billions of calculations its AI can make on the fly.
There are further issues. One huge one: Facebook’s system is a notoriously slow starter. It can take four or five days to really click into gear and start making the right decisions – which makes it tricky to use for launches or other time limited promos.
The system can also make decisions a little too hastily, in my experience. A long-standing rule-of-thumb for as long as I’ve been working in digital advertising – so at least fifteen years – is that you can’t really judge an ad until it has accrued 1,000 impressions.
Facebook obviously didn’t get the memo because I’ve seen ads get ditched by the system after as little as 200 impressions – which is calling things way too quickly.
This is a real problem because day-to-day results can be quite variable, particularly if you’re talking about the smaller budgets and audiences that authors typically work with. And that goes double for any limited-time promos where you don’t have the luxury of waiting for the system get its sea legs.
What can you do?

## Workarounds/Solutions
Even though the change doesn’t fully kick in for a while, I recommend getting ahead of it – because there are potential solutions to all these issues, but they are all quite fiddly. You will have to experiment to see which is best for your own workflow.
Options include:
- Setting Automated Rules for each Ad Set to nudge the system back on track. (More on Automated Rules from Facebook).
- Implementing max/min budgets for each Ad Set as appropriate. (Just note that Facebook advises against doing this unless you are experiencing extreme imbalance.)
- Creating separate Campaigns for each Ad Set where you want to absolutely control the budget.
Facebook
All these approaches have more or less the same goal – grabbing back that control of budget and making sure the right amount of money flows to each Ad Set. I’ve mostly been doing (3) so far, and plan to experiment a touch more with (1) or (2), because splitting everything up by Campaign is not really ideal (for example, it can create issues with audience overlap, ad fatigue, and frequency – possibly issues with bidding against yourself also). But the other approaches aren’t problem-free either.
Whatever approach you ultimately opt for, you should be able to steer things at least somewhat as intended, even if all this does create an extra layer of busywork. Which is quite ironic given that the change is intended to reduce busywork, but that’s tech for ya.

## Further Facebook Ads Resources
Some resources to help you handle all this:
1. Facebook’s Help Page on the topic. Even for Facebook, this page is surprisingly thin on the ground and doesn’t mention any of the negatives, let alone workarounds. But it’s always good to check the official material first – even just to see how they discuss the feature.
2. Jon Loomer’s peerless blog (best for more advanced users). My go-to resource for all things Facebook. One caveat: as with all general digital marketing sources, you have to translate the advice into something that will work for publishing and books. Just keep that in mind.
3. Ad Espresso’s house blog (also for more advanced users). This is a popular Facebook & Google ad management tool which I can’t give you the skinny on as I’ve never properly tried it – but I know it has its fans. I have been on their mailing list for some time now, and they share some great data for free. Same caveat as above though. Also note other ad venues are covered by them too, but Facebook is their real area of expertise.
4. Me! My weekly newsletter covers all ad platforms in depth. We are up to Episode 9 or 10 in my free series on Facebook Ads (I’d peg it as better for beginner/intermediate users but we’re getting more advanced as we go along…). Sign up here to join the fun and get access to all previous episodes gratis. No catch, other than the occasional off-color joke. And when I say occasional…
Facebook’s Help Page
Jon Loomer’s peerless blog
Ad Espresso’s house blog
Sign up here to join the fun
What do you think? Will you be negatively affected by this change? Or do you think it could streamline the Facebook Ads experience?
Update: I’m reliably informed that compulsory Campaign Budget Optimization may be postponed until as late as February 2020 for some users. The process of switching accounts over to compulsory Campaign Budget Optimization being next month, as I said, but it appears that Facebook will first focus on those accounts which have been using it a lot. I’ll update this note if I get further clarification, but, either way, I strongly recommend experimenting with this now so you don’t get ambushed.

--------------------------

BookBub Ads - What the FAQ?
Posted by David Gaughran 27 May 2021. Marketing, Resources • 22 Comments.

BookBub is a wonderfully passionate community of over ten million book buyers – and its ad platform is the only one at this scale which is exclusively made up of readers. BookBub Ads is unique in lots of other ways too and I’ve received hundreds of questions from authors over the last few months who are confused about one aspect or another. Today, we’ll look at the most frequent issues… and give you solutions to all those problems.
Four recommended BookBub Ads resources before we dive into the mailbag:
1. BookBub Ads Expert is THE best book on BookBub Ads. I can say that without hesitation because it is also the only book about BookBub Ads. Read more about the book at this dedicated page on my site, where you will also find links to all the retailers and a bunch of nice things people had to say about it.
2. My weekly marketing newsletter is free, where we regularly cover BookBub Ads, along with Facebook and Amazon Ads, as well as all other book marketing topics: reader targeting, email sorcery, how to launch a book, content marketing – the works. That goes out every Friday, and you get a free book just for signing up. Do that here if you know what’s good for ya…
3. Continuing the freepalooza is a killer set of bonus resources for purchasers of BookBub Ads Expert – a gallery of winning ad images, detailed optimization advice, up-to-the-minute info on BookBub changes, case studies, and a place to ask questions! – but you only get access to that when you buy the book, because I am crafty like that. It is a great add-on for all the glamourous and discerning folk who do purchase the book though, and they will tell you that I’ve been adding to it continually since March and it has grown into something quite cool.
4. Prefer podcasts? I’ve got you covered. But also check out a couple I did with William Bernhardt and Novel Marketing.
Read more about the book at this dedicated page on my site
Do that here
William Bernhardt
Novel Marketing
I’ve been using BookBub Ads for two or three years, I’ve been covering the platform in some depth for my mailing list for well over a year at this point, my dedicated book came out a few months ago, and the course… I can’t quite remember when that launched. Around the same time?
I’ve also run some giant campaigns for authors in a range of genres, as well as my own ads, and compared data and strategies with hundreds of other authors writing every kind of book imaginable.
These are the issues and questions which come up most frequently.

## BookBub Ads or Featured Deals?
Honestly, as fond as I am of BookBub Ads, Featured Deals beat anything hands down. You are probably getting clicks for a third or a quarter of the cost than you will get them on any ad platform, with unparalleled conversion rates too. The ROI on Featured Deals is wonderful, and nothing else comes close to matching it. A Featured Deal can deliver thousands of sales and put you in the Amazon Top 100 all on its own. They are quite something.
This power means they are in high demand though, and acceptance rates are as low as 20%. Meaning you can’t count on being selected, and you will most likely get rejected even if you have a great, well-presented book with a strong sales record. And you will almost certainly get rejected if you are in Kindle Unlimited, as BookBub strongly prefers that Featured Deals are also available to the significant numbers of readers on its lists who use Apple Books, Kobo, Google Play, or Barnes & Noble/Nook.
But aside from being open to everyone, BookBub Ads does have some key advantages, ROI differences notwithstanding: you can run them whenever you like, at whatever budget suits you, switching between whichever titles you need to push, and can choose to push harder in whatever country or retailer suits your strategic needs. It’s very flexible.

## Actually, I was able to get a Featured Deal, should I do BookBub Ads also?
I think they can perform a great 1-2 punch. You have a few different options here. Sometimes I like to scoop up any stragglers after a Featured Deal with some BookBub Ads pointed at the same audience. Other times I like to hit that same audience again with a deal on another book.
There are lots of ways to do this. For example, you can target yourself the day after the Featured Deal and you will see the Reader count – i.e. the total size of the audience you can target, which is all your Followers plus anyone that has ever interacted with your books on the platform – will have grown significantly. With new people who are proven to be interested in your work! So hit them with something else while you are fresh in their minds. Either a deal on Book 2, or something else.
Alternatively, you can use the ad platform to hit different pockets of readers that might not have seen your Featured Deal.

## How much do BookBub Ads cost?
You set your own budget, and you decide your own bids. You can (and should) start small before scaling up, and that minimizes your risk. Just don’t dump money in and expect it to work out. Be cautious to begin with. Even if you are Ms. Genre Queen. Seriously. BookBub is a very different platform and you must start from scratch here, even if you are whizz with Amazon Ads or killing it on Facebook.

## CPC or CPM – which is best?
BookBub is the only ad platform that lets you truly choose CPC or CPM – i.e. cost per click or cost per impression. Facebook appears to give you that choice, but it’s really an illusion. No matter which of the many choices you pick on Facebook, you are always getting billed by CPM regardless. Anyway, back to BookBub. Most people choose CPC because that’s what they are familiar with. Just paying for clicks sounds like just paying for results and has a logic to it. That logic is flawed, I respectfully suggest.
I find CPM works better almost all the time. And when I say “works better” I mean that it delivers cheaper clicks, more of them, stretches out your audience, teaches you how to be a better advertiser, and gives your promos more power overall. They win on every metric for me. The only time CPC works better is if you have bad ads. So… make your ads good, use CPM. It really is the way to get BookBub Ads working for you. The only real way, IMO, that you can drive click costs down to really cheap levels, and still deliver at scale. (Fuller discussion/explanation on all that in my book.)

## What kind of images work?
Good ones!
Haha, I was so tempted to just leave it at that. I probably shouldn’t, because this is the area people screw up most often. Use your book cover, have an offer, highlight the price, keep text to a minimum (even though there are no restrictions like Facebook), and above all else, make it look good FFS. I see people making their own ads, and they are just baaaaad. Honestly. Either take the time to get it right, or just outsource.
I’ve paid as little as $20 before to get some ads made up. Actually, I’ve paid less than that because my designer bundles ad graphics for free now when I get my covers made up. I also make my own quite regularly. There are a bunch of tools now which make this much easier.
I have used Canva a lot. And I’m looking forward to experimenting with Book Brush – a dedicated tool for authors making promo graphics – and also trying out a more general one called Stencil. I think I’ll do a three-way post comparing them all at some point over the next few weeks.

## Can I use BookBub Ads to push a reader magnet?
No. There is a hard restriction against using BookBub Ads to directly collect email addresses. You can point them at a book you are selling on your site, that’s perfectly fine, but not a free book where readers have to sign-up to a list before getting the download. Absolutely 100% no.
A freebie at a retailer is allowed, of course. And pointing them to a book for sale/download somewhere that has a link to your reader magnet/sign-up inside the book is totally fine as well, of course, just to be clear.

## What’s wrong with my targeting? I can’t get anything to work…
Well, the problem might be your image (see above). That’s the problem most of the time. Targeting can be tricky too though. You need to be patient and go through a proper period of testing. It’s so important that discussions around testing images and targets takes up about 20-25% of my book. If you rush through it, you are setting yourself up for a fall.
One of the common mistakes people make is simply importing a list of comp authors from Facebook or Amazon Ads, assuming they will work just as well on BookBub. You really can’t make that assumption. What you need a comp author list native to BookBub.
(If you want to learn more about the general topic of comp authors, what they are and how to find them, read this post.)

## Can’t I just target my genre?
You can, that is an option, but I strongly recommend you don’t do that. You need to target by author. Often targeting by author and genre is the way to go, especially useful when any of your targets write in more than one niche but targeting by author is a must in almost all cases.

## What about full price books?
Advertising El Dorado. Everyone wants to sell full price books. We all want some kind of machine working away in the background that will sell thousands of books for them while we sleep. But let’s get realistic: if it was that easy, everyone would be doing it.
Advertising is a tricky business. All the platforms are difficult and complex in their own way. One of BookBub’s quirks is that it is a deals newsletter primarily, so its readers respond best to discounts. Of course they do. That doesn’t mean you must have a 99¢ book or a freebie to make BookBub Ads work. But it does mean it’s a lot easier if you do. You can sell more expensive books on BookBub, but maybe not for your first rodeo. Learn the ropes first.
Oh, and a 99¢ book is best for testing, in my experience. Testing with a higher priced book is really, really hard. Also keep in mind testing with a freebie means increased response rates will mask some problems with your ads that a 99¢ book will be better at teasing out.

## What about scaling up if they are working?
This is what BookBub Ads is best at, for my money. Testing is tricky, there’s no avoiding that. But once you get over that hump, and you have a reliable list of author targets, you can scale your campaigns with relative ease. It’s not like Amazon where the wheels can come off right away when you try to up the budget. And it’s not like Facebook where you often have to step it up a little, then recalibrate, then step it up again, and so on.
Once you are seeing positive results with a campaign, you can turn BookBub Ads up to 11 and enjoy the ride.

## Do you use BookBub Ads differently when wide versus in KU?
Great question. I would punt slightly and say everything about marketing is different when you are wide. I wrote a long post about that here. Read that for a comprehensive answer.

## Has there been any big changes since your book came out?
Two changes, in fact. The first is one that people THINK is huge but is actually quite small in my opinion. The second is one that seems to have flown under the radar completely, but I think is a much, much bigger deal.
Readers v Followers: BookBub introduced a new metric called Readers. This is just a new label really for a concept that has always existed. Contrary to what many believe, BookBub doesn’t just show your ads to a target author’s Followers, but also all the people who have interacted with that author’s books on the platform – for example anyone who has clicked on their Featured Deals or Ads previously. Obviously that number is bigger. In the case of an author who has had multiple Featured Deals of free books, that number can be MUCH bigger. This has always been the case, the only change is the new label, and those numbers are now surfaced in our interfaces. Adjust accordingly.
CTR-by-Author is the change that seems to have been ignored by many people, but I think is pretty huge. If you dig into your Aggregated Stats for any campaign, you will now see a breakdown of the CTR (and CPC and CPM and impressions) for every single author in any set that you target. This is a wonderful change and is going to be so very useful in so many different ways.

## Can you share more tips around these changes?
I already have! On my BookBub Ads Resources Page – which is exclusive to purchasers ofBookBub Ads Expert. I’m a cad, yes, but also one that likes eating with some regularity as my increasingly porcine appearance will attest.

## Any more recommended resources besides the ones that line your ermine pockets?
Sure. BookBub themselves have a great blog – you should check it out. Here are all their posts on BookBub Ads, for example, although the blog covers all book marketing topics. There are some other guides and resources and case studies there too if you nose around.
But really, BookBub Ads Expert is where it’s at, he says, not quite dispassionately. It genuinely is a comprehensive guide covering all sorts of uses for the platform, and getting really deep into strategy too – with some killer tricks that could really take your sales to another level.
Do you have any questions I missed? I’ll do my best to answer them in the comments, but, fair warning: I may say “that’s covered in more detail in the book,” quite a lot, especially to very complicated questions.
Anything I can answer quickly and easily I will happily tackle.

## One last thing…
I hope you enjoyed this post! I just wanted to let you know that I send out exclusive content every Friday to my mailing list subscribers.
I talk about the latest tricks with Facebook Ads or BookBub Ads, I also get into topics like content marketing, reader targeting, and everything else under the sun that pertains to building audience and reaching readers.
By signing up to my list, you get access to the all the old emails too, as well as sneak previews of upcoming books (meaning you get the jump on the latest tricks strategies of everyone else), and exclusive discounts too.
You also get a FREE copy of Following – a book that you can’t get anywhere else! I strongly recommend that you join over ten thousand authors and sign up today because there are all sorts of bonuses you will enjoy.

--------------------------

How To Find Your Comp Authors
Posted by David Gaughran 30 March 2021. Marketing, Publishing • 16 Comments.

## The article starts below, but first: FREE STUFF!
Comp authors can be tricky, and nailing that down for yourself is increasingly important these days, especially when it comes to ads. Writers tend to tie themselves into knots over this but there is a very simple way to cut through all the noise and help determine your true comp authors.

## Comp Authors Explained
Let’s start with the basics before scaling up the complexity and getting deeper into marketing concerns.
“Comp author” is publishing shorthand for “comparable author.” You might also hear people these days in indieworld using it in phrases like “know your comps,” or “target your comp authors.” Or you might come across the phrase “comp title” more frequently in traditional publishing.
The phrase was originally used by publishing professionals as shorthand to describe a given author’s voice in marketing communications and sales pitches. For example, an agent might shop your book to a publisher describing your sizzling romantic suspense as “EL James meets Lisa Jackson,” and the acquiring editor will know right away that she’s in for a dark, twisty story where the sex isn’t just open door – the windows are probably open too.
The same trick is used in marketing where readers might be told a hot new debut is like “Malcom Gladwell meets Chuck Tingle,” and they will instantly know they are in for a profound rethinking of the societal impact of unicorn butt cops on beach patrol.
This kind of triangulation really does work, which explains its ubiquity. It was a piece of advice handed out to querying authors the last time I bothered an agent (i.e. about 10 years ago) and I believe it’s still considered best practice today. Although newbie authors are warned to adopt a different tone than marketers; instead of “The best thriller since Gone Girl,” our hypothetical agent-seeker is usually advised to use the much more demure formulation of, “May appeal to fans of David Eddings and Raymond E. Feist.”
This is something that newbie authors struggle with. But don’t worry newbs: salty old pros can struggle with it too. And coming up with comp authors is even more important for indie authors today than for the fretting queryer.
Comp authors are used by indies to inform decisions on presentation: covers, pricing, blurbs, taglines, and marketing copy generally. But these days they have a much more important role in addition to all of that: ads.
Targeting comp authors is one of the most rewarding strategies with Facebook and Amazon Ads, and pretty much the only workable approach with BookBub Ads. Not having a good sense of your true comp authors can end up getting very expensive, very quickly. It’s also one big missed opportunity, because if you can nail down good comps, you are halfway to advertising success.
The first step to homing in on your comps is overcoming an internal block – one equally shared by newbies and pros. I think this goes back to the crucible that many of us were forged in, that aforementioned query process, and the attendant (well-meant) warnings not to get too big for our boots.
Many authors can be reluctant to compare themselves to giants of the genre, or anyone with outsized success. Others can be hesitant to compare themselves to anyone at all, having a very strong sense of what makes their voice, and that of other authors, utterly unique. And then at the other end of the scale, some authors can be absolutely instinctual about how they approach the craft of writing and might simply not have any idea who writes in a similar fashion.

## Reframing The Concept of Comp Authors
Here’s the rub: it’s not about voice. It’s not even about who you write like. It’s about who you share an audience with. This simple reframing of what a comp author is – at least in a marketing sense – can be liberating.
It’s no longer about comparing yourself to Elin Hilderbrand or Brandon Sanderson or Gabriel Garcia Marquez. Instead, it reframes the question from the reader’s perspective: what other authors do my readers enjoy?
Instantly, this can unlock something inside your head. I don’t have to worry that I’m putting myself on the same level as an author who has sold over 100 million books, or who is critically acclaimed, I can simply say that Ken Follett and Bernard Cornwell are comp authors because my readers also enjoy their work. Which means that the audiences of Ken Follett and Bernard Cornwell may be fruitful targets for my ads.
This reframing is so crucial that it bears repeating: a comp author is someone who you share an audience with. Your Inner Artist may object to this reformulation, but she is not to be trusted when it comes to marketing. Remember, at least when it comes to marketing, a comp author is not a writer with a similar voice or style or level of success, but one you share an audience with.
It really is that simple and adopting this approach should expand your comp author list significantly.
(Note: almost any aspect of marketing can benefit from adopting the reader’s perspective, and I’ve written a whole book on the topic called Strangers to Superfans: A Marketing Guide to the Reader Journey, if you want to get deeper into that.)

## Building Your Comp Authors: Also Boughts
Now that you have thrown off the shackles and are ready to welcome more comp authors into your marketing life, where should you go looking for prospects? Amazon’s Also Boughts are a good place to start, as it’s a relatively pure reflection of what other books people are buying along with yours.
A couple of things to keep in mind though: various things can skew your Also Boughts.
- If you were too scattergun in your marketing, your Also Boughts might be scrambled. 
- If you just had a free run (or big 99¢ promo) which was promoted heavily on reader sites, your Also Boughts might reflect – at least for now – the other books that were free/99¢ and similarly promoted around the same time. 
- If you are a big name in your genre, then your books might be relentlessly targeted by heavy spenders on Amazon Ads, which can reorder your Also Boughts quite significantly and render them not very reflective of organic reader sentiment – which is what you are looking for. 
- Oh, and if you have sold little to date, then this data puddle won’t be reflective of anything meaningful. Indeed, Also Boughts usually don’t even begin displaying on your books until you have reached 50 sales.
Those caveats aside, Also Boughts are generally a very useful source of comp authors, and should be your first part of call. Indeed, you can end up with a very complete list just from this one step.
And many of the above skewing factors can be side-stepped by either checking the Also Boughts of your books a little deeper into your series (the Also Boughts on Book 4 should be much more reflective of what your core fans like to read rather than that more broadly flogged Book 1), or by perusing your Author Also Boughts – i.e. the list on your Amazon Author Page – as these are kind of aggregate Also Boughts across your entire catalogue.
Don’t forget one thing: you can go more than one step deep here. For example, if you write cozies and are 100% sure that you share an audience with Betty Rowlands and that she is a very solid comp author for you, then you can check out her Also Boughts and consider whether someone like Faith Martin would work for you too – even if that name don’t appear very prominently in your own Also Boughts. Just don’t go too many steps removed from your own work and its primary Also Boughts.

What if one of the above caveats does describe you? What if you haven’t really started selling yet, or if you are Mr. Big Cheese in your genre and relentless targeted by big spending advertisers? What if your Also Boughts, for whatever reason, aren’t delivering enough good comp authors?
There are a number of other potential sources for comp authors. You should have at least some sense of your work and where it fits in the marketplace, and sincerely hope you are having conversations with your readers in one form or another which will give you a sense of what else they enjoy.
Seriously, don’t dismiss that step. This information is gold and you are getting it straight from the source. You can ask your readers what they are currently reading, what their favorite book this year was, which authors are an insta-buy for them. Facebook is a good place to ask questions like this. Email is even better, because all that organic two-way communication improves your deliverability and open rates, and develops an actual relationship with your readers too, which in turn will improve engagement.
However, if you want more solid, aggregate data, Facebook Audience Insights can be eye-opening.
Although recent privacy scandals have led to Facebook quietly axing a lot of the data in this tool, there is still enough left to be very useful for our purposes. Facebook Audience Insights allows you to look at your Facebook Page and see what other pages your audience likes, and what interests they collectively have. Not only that, but you can perform the same exercise for any other Page on Facebook, and also for any custom audience you have developed, such as your list or website visitors.
And, of course, any previous adventures in advertising will have generated a short list of winners for you (and probably a much longer list of losers!). On that note…

Having gone through all this trouble to generate a list of comp authors, you think the universe would do you a solid and just let you roll out ads to all of them and see what happens. Unfortunately, the universe is an asshole.
Facebook, Amazon, and BookBub Ads are all very different platforms, with their own unique quirks. You can’t simply take one approach to all these ad venues, and so it goes with comp authors.
Here’s the bad news: you need to develop a separate list of comp authors for each venue. Which sucks, I know, but there’s a flipside. Most people don’t bother, so it’s a huge competitive advantage if you take the trouble.
About those quirks. In my personal experience, Amazon Ads seems to handle the broadest comp author list, and BookBub Ads really requires you to drill down to the tightest comp authors on that list.
Facebook Ads are a bit weird in that you can directly target some authors, but not others, and it’s not always dependent on how many Likes they have or how famous they are in meatspace either. And that can vary hugely by genre – coverage is much patchier in some genres than others. On the plus side, Facebook Ads can handle giant trad authors as comps like no other platform. And if you can identify one of those, you have your own golden goose.
BookBub Ads don’t handle those giant trad authors well at all, but if you can get a short list of medium sized indies working for you there, that’s often all you need. This platform probably has more unique quirks than any other, but if you learn to embrace those instead of fighting against them, that’s half the battle. When it comes to comp authors in particular, definitely don’t make the mistake of targeting anyone without testing – even if it’s a solid comp author that is a money printing machine for you at other ad venues.
(I also have a book called BookBub Ads Expert:A Marketing Guide To Author Discovery which covers how to use the platform in comprehensive detail, including a huge chunk on testing, and developing BookBub-specific comp authors. And if you want a free intro to the approach, I also have a short, free email-based course at Reedsy.)
While I am much more fond of spending my ad money at Facebook or BookBub, Amazon Ads is probably the best venue to do some initial testing of comp authors – particularly for those who are completely lost and have no real hard data yet on which authors work for them. This comes down to the different ways the platforms charge you.
Despite popular misconceptions, Facebook charges by impressions. Always. Even if you select the option to be charged for link clinks or video views or conversions or whatever, Facebook just takes the impression cost and converts it to your preferred metric – it always comes back to impressions in the end. In more prosaic terms, this means you will pay for your ads whether someone clicks on them or not.
(And if you want to get deeper into Facebook Ads sign up to my free marketing newsletter. You’ll get access to all the episodes you missed too in my brand new, subscriber-exclusive Email Archive.)
Bookbub gives you the choice of CPC or CPM – paying for clicks or impressions. However, as anyone who has read BookBub Ads Expert will know, I strongly, strongly recommend using CPM in almost every instance. Which means you will also be paying to show your ads there, whether someone clicks on them or not.
Amazon Ads, however, is all about clicks. You can display your ad to thousands and thousands of people, and if no one clicks on it, then you won’t pay anything at all, which makes it a good candidate for this kind of early-stage, scattergun, test advertising – even if I move the action elsewhere when I want to spend real money.

## Go Forth And Multiply
It’s baked into most of us to be a little gun shy when it comes to comp authors, but I’m going to keep repeating this until it sticks: a comp author is someone you share an audience with.
Keep telling yourself that until it becomes reflexive and start building a broader list of possible comp authors. Farm those Also Boughts, pull in data from any other source you can, and be comprehensive. You can winnow the list down later, and tailor it to each ad platform as you go. Just remember to test any author before throwing down real money.
Above all, be hard-nosed and results-driven in your approach.

--------------------------

Moving from Mailchimp to MailerLite: A Guide
Posted by David Gaughran 1 January 2026. Marketing, Resources • 69 Comments.

Mailchimp made some major changes recently which were received very negatively – causing many users to flee into the arms of alternatives like MailerLite.
I moved to MailerLite a couple of months ago, and have been very happy with the change but, there are a few things you need to watch out for. Whether you have multiple, big lists with lots of automations, or are still growing your first list on the free plans, this post will guide you through all the issues.
Warning: it’s long. But there’s a prize for making it to the end. Plus it covers a lot.
- First we run over the differences between Mailchimp and MailerLite – things like free plans, pricing, features, and integrations, and which of those differences really matter. 
- Next we look at the steps involved in physically moving your list across to MailerLite. This is actually the easiest part of the whole process, but there are some wrinkles. 
- With that taken care of, we move on to more advanced topics like switching over your automations, what to do about those pesky website forms and sign-up links, and also how to sweep up any stray Mailchimp forms out there in the wild so you don’t have precious sign-ups going to the wrong place. That last part can be tricky.
- Then we wrap up with a few things you mightn’t have considered, like how to maybe keep a shell of your Mailchimp account open without paying anything, and why you might want to do that, at least temporarily… but also the hidden costs involved. 
This post is not a comprehensive guide to those cataclysmic changes at Mailchimp which had swarms of people dropping it like a hot potato. That breakdown is here, if you missed it: Time To Ditch Mailchimp? (Spoiler Alert: the answer is “yeah, probably.”)
Okay, let’s get to it.

MailerLite is considerably cheaper than Mailchimp, but one thing can take a bite out of those savings if you are based in Europe: VAT.
Depending on the nature of your business, you may be VAT registered, but you may not be, so that charge will come out of your pocket. Even with VAT, it’s still cheaper than Mailchimp, but VAT of 20-25% is pretty hefty (depending on which part of the European smorgasboard you call home).
Americans have no such worries though.
(Click on the above pricing chart if you want to see that in more detail.)
The only other catch, of sorts, isn’t really that big of a catch anymore. Historically, one huge advantage Mailchimp had over MailerLite was that it was free for up to 2,000 email addresses, whereas MailerLite’s paid plans kicked in at 1,000 subscribers. However, now that Mailchimp has significantly hobbled the free plan and is counting unsubscribes as part of your audience, the difference is essentially non-existent.
In fact, it has arguably swung the other way because Mailchimp no longer gives you access to basic things like automations or more than one list on the free plan, whereas MailerLite gives you all that stuff. And when it comes to paid plans, MailerLite’s are considerably better value given that Mailchimp has also gutted many of the paid plans while simultaneously jacking up their prices (note: legacy paid users at Mailchimp are spared most of the changes… for now… but new and free users will see this gruesome twosome right away).
Those new basic paid plans at Mailchimp don’t even include multi-part automations anymore and are limited to three lists, which is just crazy. You could have a list of 8000 people, paying Mailchimp $75 a month, but it won’t give you access to proper automations unless you shell out for the fancier plan at $99 a month, and even then you have usage limits. It’s pretty sly.
That same list will cost you $50 a month at MailerLite, with everything included. There is no gatekeeping of needed features behind a paywall or any of that BS. And the price savings will grow with your list. (Euroheads: that $50 charge will come out at $60ish with VAT.)
One thing that might reduce your costs – on either platform – are the respective affiliate schemes. MailerLite has two versions. The Refer A Friend program earns you credit against your monthly costs for each friend you refer who signs up. It also has a more standard affiliate scheme which you can read about here. Maybe I’m missing something, but I can’t see the advantage of using the Refer A Friend program over the affiliate scheme, which seems far juicier. Mailchimp also has an affiliate program but one where you earn credits against your monthly costs rather than cash-money.
(Note: I am both a Mailchimp and MailerLite affiliate.)

## Mailchimp vs MailerLite: Features & Integrations
The feature set is pretty similar. There are some differences, but they may not be anything you particularly care about. For example, I haven’t noticed any feature missing from MailerLite yet that I was using at Mailchimp. I’m sure they exist, but I haven’t personally run into anything while rejigging a couple of onboarding sequences and sending my first few campaigns. And while MailerLite does have some extra features, they aren’t really things I use that much.
The big difference is with those Free plans, and Mailchimp’s growing tendency to strip away key features for higher priced plans. Automation is the big one obviously. Free plans at Mailchimp, and even the basic paid plans, don’t allow for more than an automated welcome message now. If you want a proper onboarding sequence for new subscribers (and you should!) then you can’t do that at Mailchimp without paying more.
The other feature differences are more minor – for me at least. MailerLite offers things like a Custom HTML editor and surveys which I don’t use, and things like sending by Time Zone and Landing Pages with custom domains, which Mailchimp does have but are only available on certain plans.
However, one big point in Mailchimp’s favor is its size, meaning the selection of integrations and plugins and widgets available are far greater. There’s no getting around that, but the number of MailerLite integrations is considerable and growing fast. Check if they have what you need here.
And then one big point in MailerLite’s favor is its challenger status, meaning customer service – in my experience at least – is more responsive and helpful and just friendlier. It feels like they want the business more, whereas maybe Mailchimp is too big to care now. (Not a slight on the customer service staff at Mailchimp, more the management/policies.)

## Moving to MailerLite: Lists
This really is the easiest part of the process. It only take a couple of clicks. Once you open your MailerLite account you can import all your Mailchimp lists with a few button presses via the Mailchimp API. There’s a step-by-step guide here if you need it, but it’s so simple you probably won’t. You have the option to import all your fields, and keep those lists separate too. It’s very neat.
And then if you want to set up new lists, or splice and dice things differently now that you won’t be charged for duplicates, that’s super easy too – just note that “Lists” are called “Groups” at MailerLite (and have been changed to “Audiences” at Mailchimp – in case you haven’t logged in recently).
Unlike Mailchimp, you don’t start paying at MailerLite when you exceed the Free thresholds. You won’t pay anything until you actively upgrade your plan – but you will need to do that before sending to your list if it is greater than 1,000 subscribers, of course. But you can go ahead and open your account, import your list now, and get it all set up.
You don’t have to upgrade your plan and start paying MailerLite until you are ready to start sending emails.
Whether you start off on a Free plan or upgrade right away, I recommend familiarizing yourself with the interface. Set up all your lists (i.e. “Groups”), and copy across your various automations and onboarders (more on that below). I think I tooled around for a couple of weeks before actually importing my list, so you can do it that way too if you like. Just keep in mind that you might end up continuing to pay Mailchimp during any changeover period even if you reduce your subscriber count to nothing. More on that below too.
Anyway, moving subscribers is the easy part. Switching your forms and automations is a little trickier, and requires lining everything up right.

For some reason, I had it in my head that MailerLite’s automations either weren’t that advanced or were clunky or otherwise hard to use. I was very wrong. The system is simpler in the sense that the interface is much cleaner and more manageable, but you can do a lot more with MailerLite’s automations. Or maybe the system is just easier to use that I’m discovering more features, I don’t know.
You’ll see what I mean when you play around with it. Once you get used to the interface differences, it’s all quite intuitive. The only real thing I’ll add here is that you should take the opportunity to optimize those automations while you are going to the trouble of rebuilding them anyway.
If you’ve been skating by with a simple welcome email to date, and haven’t been properly onboarding people, then now is the time to build that out. And if you don’t send any welcome emails at all, then go stand in the corner until you’ve read Newsletter Ninja.
If you do have a multi-stage automation to warm up new subscribers, great. But perhaps review your reports in Mailchimp one last time to see if one of the emails isn’t pulling its weight. For me personally, I actually shortened my onboarding sequence. I felt the welcome emails were not fully representative of the weekly content of my list, and what I now do instead is push people towards my brand new Email Archive, which houses all the greatest hits.
This saves me a little admin too as new subscribers were often requesting links to previous emails on Facebook Ads or BookBub or how to launch a new pen name. Now they get access to all of that as part of the sign-up process.
This also helps with my deliverability and open rates, as I don’t have to put so many links in emails. But the decision to create an Email Archive was inspired by something else: a welcome bit of forthrightness from Mailchimp customer support. I was asking them what happens to the web versions of all my old emails (like this, for example). While Mailchimp said that those old emails would initially survive my account being paused or closed, they couldn’t guarantee how long they would stay up for. Fair enough, perhaps, but something to keep in mind if you also refer back to old emails a lot.
The only remaining wrinkle is what to do with subscribers part-way through an automation sequence, especially if it’s one that plays out over multiple weeks. Well, there’s no super neat solution here, because (AFAIK) you can’t just dump people into Step 3 of your new MailerLite automation. If you add those subscribers into the group which has a new automation attached, that will start them back at Step 1. But you can also choose to not have the automation fire at all and just throw them straight into your regular pool of subscribers. That’s what I chose to do as it’s easiest.
If you are having any trouble with setting up your automations, or just getting a handle on the interface, as this aspect is quite different to Mailchimp (but better, once you get it), then check out this helpful video guide. There are lots more guides like this on the MailerLite site too if you want to delve into segmentation or anything else.

Rebuilding automations in MailerLite is actually fine. It’s not quite the button pressing ease of importing a list, but I got through it way quicker than expected. Switching those forms across, and hunting down everywhere you might have scattered sign-up links is a bear though.
Well, it actually depends. If you were smart when dropping sign-up links in your books or during interviews or on social media etc., you would have linked to a page like this – a clean, optimized sign-up page on a domain which you control. Switching this to MailerLite just requires changing the place the form is pointing at. You can do that with plugins/widgets or you can get into the code itself, if you prefer.
This is really important: you must remember to re-authenticate your domain after switching to MailerLite. This will improve the deliverability of your emails. The guide to doing this is here and it basically involves going to the website of whoever your hoster is (e.g. GoDaddy) and changing the DNS records.
Just don’t do what I did, i.e. start the authentication process, get distracted by a sandwich, and then forget to finish it. This will break your sign-up forms and have everyone at customer service scratching their heads (sorry, customer service people).
That’s not the only wrinkle though. Maybe you didn’t realize that best practice for sign-ups was to host the form on your own site, rather than to use the free Mailchimp sign-up forms. If you linked to those instead, you have a more painful task ahead of you. This is what I used to do pre-2018 when I was crap at email, so I feel your pain. I still have a lot of books and posts floating out there in the cyber-ether pointing at Mailchimp forms.
I know that will describe some of you too, so here’s a workaround. Actually, I think everyone should do this to make 100% sure you have closed off all the pipelines going to Mailchimp.

After I switched everything over to MailerLite, I turned off my automations at Mailchimp. I knew there would still be some people trickling in from somewhere, but I also knew that if they didn’t get the free books they were promised, they would email me to complain. I wanted them to complain!
Why? Because it gave me the opportunity to ask them where they signed up (and to apologize and give them their free book, of course). I find a couple of little pipelines into Mailchimp through this method, but it also gave me piece of mind too. I then took that handful of people and dropped them into my onboarder which started automatically firing and whisking them through.
Maybe you want to monitor that kind of thing over a longer period, but you don’t want to pay Mailchimp a hefty sum just to make sure you have switched all your forms and links across. There’s a way, but let me explain something about Mailchimp billing first, so you don’t get stung too badly.
Mailchimp determines your monthly fee based on the size of your list, but it makes that calculation based on the highpoint of that number in the last 30 days. I presume this is to stop people gaming the billing system by importing 20,000 subscribers, sending an email, then exporting them all again and paying nothing. So whatever the high water mark was in the last 30 days, that’s what they use to calculate your billing.
In other words, if you have 3,500 subscribers, and then move them all across to MailerLite and then export the records to your computer (which you must do to comply with GDPR – you must maintain records of how everyone signed up, and I don’t think importing your list to MailerLite will suffice), and reduce that subscriber count down to zero just to see who trickles in, you will get charged for 3,500 subscribers on your next billing date.
Closing your account or pausing your account means you will dodge that bill, but just reducing the account to zero won’t do that. But there is a workaround if you want to keep a shell of your account open for monitoring purposes, and you can follow the steps here – scroll down to “Downgrade to the Free plan.”
You have to actively downgrade your plan, simply removing all subscribers won’t trigger that for you. Note that if you have downgraded to the Free plan previously, and subsequently upgraded to a Paid plan, you will not be able to downgrade again.
Also of note: Mailchimp says this will keep your old emails from getting purged – remember, Mailchimp can’t guarantee that for paused or closed accounts.
However, there is a kind of hidden cost to doing this. That Mailchimp policy of charging you based on the high water mark of your subscriber account is going to kick in here, at least for the first month you are back on the Free plan. It’s only the subsequent month where you will commence paying nothing.
So, I made a clean break – I just wanted to outline the option to you, and the associated cost. To permanently close your account, follow these steps. Remember this will permanently delete your account, all your lists, reports, and maybe those old emails too. Make sure to back up all your data first. That process will export all your lists, reports, templates, campaigns, and any content you uploaded like pictures. It’s quite handy. However, if you ever deleted any audiences or contacts, those are gone permanently.

## Moving From Mailchimp: A Checklist
That’s it! Moving is really not as bad as you think. You will be glad you did it, especially if you take my advice and use this as an opportunity to buff up your automations. Here’s a handy checklist to help you order your tasks:
1. Sign up for your MailerLite account. Familiarize yourself with the interface and Help pages (they’re great, actually – with lots of video too if that’s how you roll).
2. Import your list. Don’t worry about this automatically triggering payment. It’s not like Mailchimp, and you don’t start paying until you want to. (You can’t send to lists over 1,000 people until you do though.)
3. Organize your account into the various Lists/Groups you want to use.
4. Build your Automations/Welcome Emails/Onboarding Sequences.
5. Switch Your Sign-Up Forms/Plugins/Widgets (plus your links in your books, if necessary).
6. Export your audiences/lists to your computer for safekeeping – even though you have already imported them to MailerLite. You will need to keep records of how everyone signed up to comply with GDPR so this is very important.
7. Start sending your newsletters from MailerLite.
8. Close your Mailchimp account once you’re sure all sign-up forms are switched and data is exported. (Or revert to a free account by downgrading your plan to monitor that temporarily.)
Sign up for your MailerLite account

## One last thing…
I hope you enjoyed this post! I just wanted to let you know that I send out exclusive content every Friday to my mailing list subscribers.
I talk about the latest tricks with Facebook Ads or BookBub Ads, I also get into topics like content marketing, reader targeting, and everything else under the sun that pertains to building audience and reaching readers.
By signing up to my list, you get access to the all the old emails too, as well as sneak previews of upcoming books (meaning you get the jump on the latest tricks strategies of everyone else), and exclusive discounts too.
You also get a FREE copy of Following – a book that you can’t get anywhere else! I strongly recommend that you join over ten thousand authors and sign up today because there are all sorts of bonuses you will enjoy.

--------------------------

Time To Ditch Mailchimp?
Posted by David Gaughran 1 January 2026. Marketing, Publishing, Resources • 348 Comments.

Mailchimp attracted extreme criticism this week when it became clear how its new marketing services would impact its core email offering — particularly in terms of pricing — leading many long-time users to start explore alternatives (including this one).
I have been a loyal and happy Mailchimp customer for over eight years. I have also recommended Mailchimp to thousands of other authors. There have always been cheaper services, or those with more bells-and-whistles when it comes to advanced automation options and the like, but — for me at least — Mailchimp was always the perfect combination of price, user friendliness, and reliability.
Until yesterday.
FYI: this is a long and comprehensive post going over the changes to Mailchimp’s Pricing Plans and Terms of Use. If you want the short version, if you had a (paid) Monthly plan before May 15, you are protected from the worst of the changes for now, but might still want to scoot down to Alternatives to Mailchimp at the bottom of this post as I still think bad things are on the horizon for you. For everyone else — i.e. Free, Pay As You Go, or New users — the negative implications are much more immediate.

Mailchimp announced its pivot towards a full-service marketing platform on Monday. But it wasn’t until Wednesday that Mailchimp Legal began emailing existing users about changes to the Terms of Use that were kicking in immediately that day.
These changes included entirely new pricing tiers and policies, and a revamping of associated feature sets, with some pretty radical differences. Mailchimp’s emails weren’t clear on what was changing or who was affected, Help pages weren’t updated properly, and Support was giving out conflicting information.
When the dust settled, it wasn’t pretty.
The biggest change of all is that Mailchimp no longer determines monthly charges based on total subscriber count — as has historically been the case, and as is standard among email services. Instead, Mailchimp now bases monthly charges on a new metric which it calls Audiences, which some users may have noticed appearing in their accounts recently.
Key here is that Audiences also includes unsubscribed emails, meaning that users will be charged for unsubscribed emails as well as subscribed ones. Naturally, this announcement was received very negatively by Mailchimp users, as some would be facing increases of over 100% in their monthly charges (myself included). The situation was compounded with a lot of confusion, as the Help pages at Mailchimp weren’t yet fully updated to account for these changes, and Support seemed confused about whether existing users would be grandfathered in under the old terms.
First, Mailchimp explicitly told me in an email that legacy users would be affected by this new policy.
Several hours later, after a hugely negative reaction online, Mailchimp appeared to backtrack, saying that legacy users would be unaffected by these changes — which would only apply to new users. Whether this was a change of heart, or muddled messaging, or a simple error, it’s hard to know for sure.
Hi David. It looks like our billing agent provided incorrect information regarding your account. We're sorry about that. Our new pricing plans apply only to new users, so your account won't be affected unless you purchase a new plan to use more features.
May 15, 2019
However, this doesn’t appear to be the full story — which seems typical of this bungled rollout. And several more crucial changes buried in the new Terms of Use haven’t been communicated to users at all. Some of which are pretty damn big. (You can read the new Terms of Use here.)
Furthermore, a close examination of the now-updated Help pages shows that legacy users of the Mailchimp’s Free plan will be badly affected by these changes. Previously, Mailchimp’s pricing model was free up until a user reached 2,000 subscribers, at which point you transitioned to a paid plan. It was a clever approach from Mailchimp which got them lots of new customers and made it the easiest service to recommend.
Mailchimp’s pricing policy is now changing. Not only will unsubscribed users count towards the 2,000 threshold, all those on a Free plan who subsequently transition to a paid plan will do so under the new pricing regime with no option to be grandfathered in under the old system.
Additionally, those who are paid customers under the Pay As You Go system — where users pay per send rather than per month, something which was very popular with users who emailed more sporadically then regularly (for example, if you only used your list to announce new releases) — will be adversely affected also, despite Mailchimp’s claims.
First, any credits they purchased before 15 May will expire in one year — despite Mailchimp previously stating that these credits will never expire. That could get Mailchimp in some legal hot water, of course, and has caused extreme anger, particularly among those who stocked up and bought significant numbers of credits recently.
Mailchimp is explicit about not offering any cash refunds for purchased credits, but it seems email credits will now convert into dollar credits towards a Mailchimp Monthly plan. However, anyone converting to this monthly plan, even if they do it right away will be subjected to the new pricing regime, with no option to be grandfathered in under the old system.

## What Happened With Mailchimp‘s pricing and policies?
The only customers spared — for the moment — are those who were on a legacy paid Monthly plan as of 15 May, the day these changes were announced. I asked Mailchimp if they could guarantee that legacy Monthly plan users wouldn’t be forced into the new pricing regime at any point in the future. I also asked Mailchimp if moving to a new pricing tier (i.e. when your subscriber count increases) would trigger a move to the new pricing regime.
Mailchimp failed to respond to these inquiries and would only confirm that if you purchase any add-ons to your legacy plan, this may immediately trigger a move to the new pricing regime. So, I think it’s probably wise to conclude that this change will come to legacy Monthly plans too, sooner rather than later, I would guess — probably under some guff about “harmonizing the Mailchimp payment plans” or similar corporate blather.
Indeed, in a statement to TechCrunch, all Mailchimp would say is that legacy customers will “maintain current pricing structure and features for the time being” — which isn’t very reassuring and sounds very temporary.
Naturally, this has some people asking what the alternatives are, and I’ll get to that in a moment. But you’re probably asking yourself how we get here, and, crucially, whether there is any chance of this change being rolled back.
UPDATE September 11: As predicted, Mailchimp pricing plans for Legacy users have now changed and prices increased have by 15-20%.

## Mailchimp’s Big Pivot
Mailchimp has been slowly building out additional marketing services over the last couple of years: customizable landing pages, a real-world address finder so you can do things like send postcards to your customers, and the ability to run Facebook, Instagram, or Google Ads to your email subscribers via their platform.
This week, Mailchimp fully pivoted to becoming a CRM platform — short for Customer Relationship Management. Essentially, Mailchimp wants to be your go-to platform for managing the entirety of your relationship with a customer, not just for email marketing.
This begs a lot of questions of course. Why would Mailchimp want to do this? Well, according to founder and CEO Ben Chestnut, this pivot will help Mailchimp bring in a staggering $700m in revenue for 2019.
The other obvious question is why anyone would want to run their Facebook or Google ads via Mailchimp, and that question is much harder to answer. Mailchimp claims these changes are driven by customer demand but that is difficult to believe.
I know literally no one that wants Mailchimp to become an all-in-one Marketing Platform. Exactly everyone I have spoken to is concerned that Mailchimp is moving away from its core competency and losing focus too. All the recent changes have been crappy (e.g. Audiences). https://t.co/5MzGKUWPr1
May 15, 2019
You may or may not be interested in the deeper reasoning behind this big change from Mailchimp, I merely explain it to show that this is new set of policies has been a long time coming, is part of an overall corporate strategy which Mailchimp views as central to its future. In other words, this approach is unlikely to be reversed. It seems that Mailchimp has invested to much in this pivot.
Which leaves authors with a choice. Can they keep recommending Mailchimp? Can they keep using Mailchimp — even though switching is a giant pain in the ass?
I’ll argue momentarily that the answers to those questions is “No” and “Probably Not” but let’s break down the full implications depending on what kind of user you are, before looking at alternatives recommended by the Newsletter Ninja herself — Tammi Labrecque.

Mailchimp’s rebranding as a supposed one-stop-shop for all your customer marketing needs is more worrying on a general level, as it indicates a lack of focus on the core product — particularly pertinent when Mailchimp launches those other services by making adverse changes to its email offering.
Of particular concern, however, are those immediate and negative changes to email:
1. Charging by Audiences is patently unfair. You aren’t using those contacts, but you have to maintain records of them for GDPR compliance (and other reasons I’ll get to), so there is no justification for deciding how much you pay based on inactive subscribers.
2. This will inflate costs for mosts users, significantly in some cases. If you have a large mailing list, you will have a lot of unsubscribes. It goes with the territory. Things that also increase unsubscribes include very common practices such as listbuilder promos, competitions, reader magnets, BookFunnel giveaways, or any kind of advertising aimed at boosting your mailing list. Most galling of all, those who are strict about engaging in email best practices such as list hygiene/list culling and using onboarders to weed out users who shouldn’t be on your list, will have a lot of unsubscribes for the most legitimate of all reasons. Finally, if — like me — you run your onboarder through a separate list, which people do for various logistical reasons, all new sign-ups essentially get unsubscribed when they finished onboarding and moved to a new list. Which means in practice your Audience size will be over double your actual subscriber count. Under the new Mailchimp pricing regime, this means your costs will now double too.
3. Mailchimp’s justification for charging by Audiences is that you can now use their remarketing services to reach these unsubscribes, like by sending them a postcard or running a Facebook campaign to unsubscribes. But Mailchimp will charge you for unsubscribes even if you never use these services. Which is completely ludicrous. You can’t charge customers for services they have never used and have no intention of using.
4. Deleting unsubscribes is definitely not the answer, as I’ve seen some suggest. Deleting unsubscribes could cause you two kinds of legal trouble. First, under my reading of GDPR, this will put you in breach of the requirement to maintain records of how a customer subscribed. You can only delete their records if they request a deletion. (That’s my understanding, at least, as someone who is not a lawyer and definitely not a GDPR expert.) Second, if Customer X unsubscribes from your list in the normal manner, and then enters some kind of group competition or promotion (like BookSweeps or a BookFunnel giveaway) that you are participating in, you are not legally allowed email Customer X again. But if you have deleted them as a contact, you will have no record of this unsubscribe, you will add Customer X to your list again when importing all the participants, and then when you invariably email Customer X again you will be breaking the law. Third, if you have any level of visibility, you might be attracting junk/spam sign-ups to your list. If you are a big author, you probably get a lot of junk sign-ups. Leaving these spammers as Unsubscribed acts as a kind of block from them signing up again under that email and keeps the problem manageable. Simply deleting these junk sign-ups leaves spammers to sign up again under the same address, removing your only real defense, other than double opt-in — which doesn’t prevent it from happening.

## Why Mailchimp’s Pricing and Policy Changes Are Bad
5. Mailchimp’s workaround is extremely problematic. Mailchimp has attempted to defend the above by saying, “If you plan to use Mailchimp for only email marketing, you can archive your unsubscribed contacts so that they are not counted towards your whole audience pricing.” I’m not entirely clear on the GDPR implications of archiving contacts, even after reading Mailchimp’s Help pages and explicitly asking Support about same in numerous emails — a subject which was ignored, I should note. Even leaving that non-trivial matter aside, archiving unsubscribes fails to deal with the problems above surrounding importing previous unsubscribes, preserving customer history for various business reasons, those who do onboarding via a separate list, and fails to prevent junk sign-ups. Even with this workaround, it will still increase your costs as Mailchimp’s pricing plan will charge you based on the highest point your audience reached over the last 30 days. It also creates yet another layer of busywork, forcing users to manually archive everyone that unsubscribes, and the more irregularly you do that, because it’s a cumbersome process and Mailchimp hasn’t designed the tools to do it easily and quickly, the more you will end up paying. As with double-counting subscribers who are on multiple lists, Mailchimp has again made a top-down business decision that unfairly costs users unless they engage in continual, maddening busywork. Except this is several factors worse as no one can avoid unsubscribes.
And, of course, there is a massive trust issue with Mailchimp now, where there was none really before. It’s hard to give your backing to a company that has screwed its users in such a dramatic fashion.
UPDATE May 22: A UK lawyer has been in touch to dispute some of my interpretations of GDPR above and I’ve noted those issues at length in this comment below. Doesn’t materially affect the overall post, but fans of GDPR arcanery — everyone, right? — might want to read that.

## What Should You Do?
Given all the above, here are my recommendations for New users, Free users, legacy Pay as You Go users, and legacy Monthly users.
I think New users should avoid signing up for a Mailchimp plan unless they reverse these changes — which I doubt will happen. So New users should look for alternatives. You’ll get info on some of those below.
Same goes for Free users. They may have a little breathing time until they hit that 2,000 Audience total limit, but Free users should start planning ahead and looking at other services.
The same also goes for Pay As You Go users. The situation is a little more complicated for them, depending on how many credits they have purchased. Those with significant credits may wish to interface with Mailchimp’s billing department to see what options are available in terms of converting to Monthly plan credit. But, in general, my recommendation is that Pay As You Go users should look for alternatives so they are ready when their credits are used up. It’s an open question whether Mailchimp is planning to phase out Pay As You Go altogether at some point — it could explain why credits suddenly have a 12-month shelf life.
The situation is more nuanced again for legacy users on a paid Mailchimp Monthly plan (which includes me). For the moment, we seem to be spared this new pricing system. It’s notable that Mailchimp Support were reasonably quick to respond to my other questions yesterday, but pointedly refused to give any guarantees that legacy Monthly users wouldn’t eventually be subject to the new pricing system at a later point, despite numerous opportunities to do so.
My take is that it will probably happen at some point for legacy Monthly users too. Indeed, the new Terms of Use — which everyone automatically agrees to by continuing to use Mailchimp after 15 May — explicitly gives Mailchimp that power.
Because of this, and all the foregoing, particularly the trust issue which has now appeared out of nowhere, my recommendation for legacy Monthly users is to start looking for alternatives too — although you appear to have a little more breathing room than everyone else. For now, at least.

In case you are still unconvinced of the need to look elsewhere for mailing list services, I discovered some more changes which weren’t communicated to users at all. These currently affect new users only, and anyone else switching to a paid Monthly plan, but I think we can expect them to impact everyone eventually. Certainly, they indicate the direction Mailchimp is heading. And that is a very worrying direction indeed.
Basic Mailchimp plans are now limited to just three audiences. In other words, you can’t have more than three separate mailing lists without paying for a premium plan which costs 50% more. This will greatly affect anyone who writes in multiple genres, or keeps separate lists for whatever reason (onboarding, different niche, separate pen name, blog subscription, side business, etc.). Even the premium plan only allows you to have five audiences. To show how limiting that is, I currently have seven audiences before I even launch my new pen name. And, of course, the new pricing regime means you can’t even combine audiences without getting charged double for moving those names across.
Most shockingly, Mailchimp’s basic paid plans will no longer include multi-step automations. This is a fairly basic feature for any email service — it’s normal to welcome new sign-ups to your list with an automated sequence of emails. Mailchimp will no longer include that feature in new Monthly plans, unless you upgrade to a more expensive plan, which will be charged at an even higher rate per month. Also not included in entry-level plans anymore are previously included features such as send time optimization and delivery by time zone.
Another change which is bound to be hugely unpopular, and sure to cause Mailchimp trouble as they haven’t flagged this to users either, is that Mailchimp will no longer automatically move you up (and down) the various pricing tiers depending on your usage/subscriber count.
Instead the onus will be on you to continually and proactively purchase higher plans as you grow. If you fail to do so, Mailchimp will levy penalty charges on your account. Despite Mailchimp saying in the new Terms of Use that these charges are detailed on the pricing pages, I couldn’t find them anywhere.
Finally, Mailchimp has had a long-standing and permanent 10% discount for using two-factor authentication. This is now transitioning to a temporary, three-month discount. It’s yet another back-door price increase, and 10% is not nothing either.
To sum up all the financial aspects, Mailchimp pricing has massively increased through underhanded means, and features have been gutted at the same time. To give a real-world example, if I was starting a new Monthly plan with Mailchimp today, the cumulative effect of these changes would mean I’d actually be charged triple what I’m paying right now without even getting the full set of features I have right now. For that, I’d have to subscribe to the Premium plan where I’d be facing an increase of up to 500%. It’s crazy!

As I have been using Mailchimp for the last eight years, without needing to look at alternatives, I thought it best to bring in a real email expert to make some recommendations here. Regular readers will know that I namedNewsletter Ninjaas my book of the year in January. Here is the author, Tammi Labrecque, with some quick advice for those looking to switch providers:
If budget is your primary concern, MailerLite represents a nice intersection of cost and functionality. If money is less of an object, Kit is recommended by heavy hitters like Andre Chaperon.
In the interests of full disclosure, please note the MailerLite/Kit links are affiliate links (mine not Tammi’s). I’m also a Mailchimp affiliate, and have been for eight years, in case you think such relationships color any perspectives here.
I haven’t made my own decision yet, but I’m personally leaning towards MailerLite. I will send maybe a million emails in 2019, so I’m a reasonably heavy user. While I do have onboarding sequences and engage in a little tagging and segmenting, I don’t go heavy into those activities at all, so, for me personally, I think ConvertKit or Active Campaign might be overkill. But they may suit your needs better, so check them out.
I couldn’t possibly do a comprehensive survey of all available alternatives in this already long post. But if you have personal experience of any service you wish to share, please do that in the comments below; I think everyone would find it helpful, whether your experience was positive or negative.

While all this is undoubtedly a giant pain in the ass I’m going to try and weave a silver lining here and redo my automations when I switch. Freshen them up, link to some of the previous highlights of the newsletter. Tweak a few things here and there. Doing all that is a pain normally, but if I must redo them again, I might as well buff them up.
If you want to use this an opportunity to reorganize your lists, change your email approach, get better at automations or tagging or segmentation (or learn what all that stuff is), then I’d strongly advise you to purchase Tammi Labrecque’s superb book Newsletter Ninja.
And if you want much more hand-holding, as luck would have it, Tammi’s excellent Newsletter Ninja course is opening up again in July and there are only a few places left. I took it myself previously and it genuinely was career-changing. I don’t say things like that often, people.
You can check out the course here, but let me just stress that it’s not just a bunch of videos. You get group classes and individual consulting as part of the package, so you really do get tailored solutions for your particular mailing list needs. (I’m not an affiliate for her course, by the way, and only get paid in the frustratingly soft currency of kudos, which isn’t accepted in any of my local bars.)
That’s it! Thank you for making it to the end of this post before dying of old age. Please do comment and tell us about your mailing list provider experiences and consider sharing this post with your fellow writers so they know what’s up.
Oh, Mailchimp. What a self-inflicted and catastrophic fail.
UPDATE May 22: A UK lawyer has been in touch to dispute some of my interpretations of GDPR above and I’ve noted those issues at length in this comment below. Doesn’t materially affect the overall post, but fans of GDPR arcanery — everyone, right? — might want to read that.
UPDATEhttps://davidgaughran.com/2019/07/03/moving-mailchimp-mailerlite-switching-guide/July 4: I went with MailerLite in the end. I’ve been using them for several weeks and am very happy. I published a guide to from Mailchimp to MailerLite right here – it covers everything from pricing and feature differences, to moving your subscribers, rebuilding automations, logistics, and pitfalls to watch out for.

## One last thing…
I hope you enjoyed this post! I just wanted to let you know that I send out exclusive content like every Friday to my mailing list subscribers.
I talk about the latest tricks with Facebook Ads or BookBub Ads, I also get into topics like content marketing, reader targeting, email marketing, and everything else under the sun that pertains to building audience and reaching readers.
By signing up to my list, you get access to the all the old emails too, as well as sneak previews of upcoming books (meaning you get the jump on the latest tricks strategies of everyone else), and exclusive discounts too.
You also get a FREE copy of Following – a book that you can’t get anywhere else! I strongly recommend that you join thousands and thousands of authors and sign up today because I have some really special treats coming soon.

--------------------------

Reader Targeting Influences Everything
Posted by David Gaughran 13 April 2021. Marketing, Publishing • 10 Comments.

Reader Targeting is yet another concept we have to juggle. It’s no wonder many writers take to the drink, or otherwise lose the run of themselves. Or can be a little… kooky. We have to wrestle with a number of contradictory notions all the time — it’s enough to make anyone batty.
The most obvious is with the writing itself: we need at least some level of ego to push something out into the world and ask money for it. But we also must have the requisite critical faculties to see what’s wrong with it and to motivate ourselves to fix it, and to otherwise work on our craft until the things we make are as good as we need them to be.
(As a famous editor once put it — Nan Talese maybe? — those first few years, when our taste is much more developed than our skills, are tough.)
The experienced author isn’t done with these trying dichotomies though; one in particular that we all continue to struggle with is between our artistic natures, and our commercial sensibilities. It’s not so much about what to write or how to write it — most pros can navigate that part. The battlegrounds are elsewhere, things like cover design, series titles, descriptions, branding.
And one more surprising, perhaps: reader targeting.
It’s not just with packaging that our Inner Artist can lead us astray, trying to convince us to be unique instead of realizing that a cover’s job is to communicate genre very clearly and get readers, the right readers, to click.
That Inner Artist is often what drives us to create, but she can mislead us with marketing, trying to push us to broader audience. That feeling of wanting to share it with the world is great and beautiful and powers us through some tough moments in the process of creation but can actually harm our book’s chances of connecting with its core readership.
And it’s not just those indulging their Inner Artist at the wrong moment who can fall into this trap. I also see very hard-nosed commercially minded writers seeking to “break out” of a niche they haven’t dominated yet, which is a little backwards.
The core principle of reader targeting is this: aim your book exclusively at true fans of that genre.
That might seem uncontroversial, but it’s harder to adhere to than you might think. Your Inner Artist is quite the Wormtongue. You can be building an Amazon Ads campaign and wondering whether you should include Conn Iggulden as a comp author. Your commercial instincts will be telling you that you don’t really have enough audience crossover with this author as your books don’t have quite as much action, but your Inner Artist will seductively whisper, “tryyyyy it.”
BookBub might knock you back for the Historical Fiction list and offer you Action/Adventure instead, which isn’t really a good fit, but your Inner Artist can convince you to make a bad decision. These adjacent audiences are a killer and where we waste most of our money.
But it’s not just wasted money that is the danger here. In fact, with really adjacent audiences you can actually make the sale to that reader who isn’t quite in your target audience. As you should all know by now, this can scramble your Also Boughts, something I have spoken about a lot.
Dangers of Also Bought pollution aside, these are the readers that may be less than happy with your story, and can leave you a bad review. Only a small percentage of readers bother doing that though, the more insidious cost — Also Boughts aside — is the slow corrosion of DNFs and weak-ass sellthrough and strangely low sign-ups to our mailing list and muted page reads after a push of some kind.

The way to combat this is to enshrine that core principle of reader targeting in absolutely everything you do. It’s not just about pointing your ads at the right people, that philosophy has to influence the entire chain. This means your description, your cover, the categories and keywords you choose, the story itself, of course, the way your write your end matter, the manner in which you speak to readers during your onboarding process for your newsletter — all this stuff should be appealing explicitly and exclusively to your target audience.
I think people mostly get the “explicitly” part but often struggle with the “exclusively” part. A simple example: a lot of people fall into the trap of posting things like cat pictures and memes to their Facebook Pages, because these tend to be very popular and generate a lot of engagement. But that popularity is a general one, it’s not unique to your target audience. It’s much better to focus on things that appeal exclusively to your target audience.
Your Inner Artist might be the kind of people pleaser that desperately wants everyone to Like that Facebook Page, but you have to remind yourself that it’s okay to turn people off. You want to repel the people who aren’t your core audience. (This is really important, in fact.)
To ground this more explicitly in the world of books, a snarky first-person blurb might be the perfect way to sell a snarky first-person contemporary romance or urban fantasy, and an excellent way to speak to those particular readers as they join your mailing list, but will be incredibly jarring for third-person epic fantasy or science fiction.
Those readers might mock such blurbs when they see them, or make snide comments about a man-titty cover in romance or a glowy hands cover in urban fantasy but their opinion is irrelevant because it’s not for them — and you certainly don’t want to fall into the trap of sanding down all those distinctive edges in an attempt to appeal to everyone, as you’ll usually end up being so bland that you appeal to no one. Really, those knots and grains in the wood are what make up your voice anyway, the unique fingerprint that makes a book uniquely yours.
It’s not an easy mindset to adopt. There’s barely enough room in our heads as it is between our Inner Artist and Inner Businessperson and all those characters screaming to get out too. Which is why I developed the concept of the Ideal Reader. Or, in true hack style, stole it from Stephen King.
Most of us are familiar with King’s concept of the Ideal Reader — the person you are writing for. It can be someone you actually know (for him, it’s his wife), but more often it’s an idealized person, representative of your target audience.
My “twist” was to take that concept from the artistic part of the process to the commercial side. If you have read my book Strangers to Superfans, you will know that I talk about how to develop this concept of your Ideal Reader and why that’s important. Because once you can put yourself in the shoes of your Ideal Reader, you look at your entire marketing and publishing process with new eyes.
It’s a POV shift, and all writers will know how that can totally change the perception of a scene. And once you look at that journey your Ideal Reader takes, from being completely unaware of you and your work, to being the kind of raving fan that does the selling for you, you will start to identify a number of roadblocks. Failure points, I think I called them in the book, which is such a neat phrase I must have stolen it from someone else. (Chris Fox maybe? Sorry Chris!)
This is all a very diplomatic way of saying that we screw it up all the time.
An interesting contrast is to look at the really huge bestsellers. Often we talk about a kind of “X factor” that these books seem to have, and what I think that truly involves is every single element being in perfect harmony: the product, the presentation, and the promotion. All of it is appealing explicitly and exclusively to the Ideal Reader of that book.

## The article starts below, but first: FREE STUFF!
What this means for you on a practical level is that you might not have a clear idea of your Ideal Reader, but even if you do, you might not be aware of the roadblocks that are in place, preventing more of those people you are pointing ads towards becoming true fans of your work. You might be — unwittingly — chaining together a series of those failure points and losing a lot of people along the way.
The good news is that all this can be reversed. And when you flip those failure points into conversion factors, when you optimize each stage of The Reader Journey, the cumulative effect can be incredible.
If you are interested in getting into all that topic a little deeper, check out my book Strangers to Superfans — that link will take you to a page here on this site where you can choose your preferred retailer, and you should find it everywhere for around $4.99, give or take a few pennies where taxes and currencies are involved. It’s also available in paperback, if that’s how you roll.
The key point, though, is this: reader targeting isn’t just something you do with ads. It should be baked in to everything.
The above post was written for my mailing list last summer, but the topic was on my mind recently as I spent a lot of time discussing this with the guys at The Bestseller Experiment podcast, where we got deep into how Amazon works, how important Also Boughts are in the recommendation engine, and why you need to look at reader targeting holistically, so it doesn’t just inform your ads, but the cover and blurb too, as well as the tropes baked into the story itself.
If that last point above intrigues you, check out Chapter 15 of Superfans where I talk to Kit Rocha about how she views branding as an extension of worldbuilding.
And if you don’t want to miss emails like this in the future, sign up here to my free marketing newsletter. Over the last year we’ve covered everything from reader targeting and launch plans, to how a new writer gets going in today’s environment (or how an older one might relaunch themselves or start fresh in a new genre).
We’ve even done an in depth (and free) series on BookBub Ads and Facebook Ads, and you get free access to all that stuff after you sign up.

--------------------------

How To Build An Author Platform
Posted by David Gaughran 3 April 2021. Marketing, Publishing • 15 Comments.

## The article starts below, but first: FREE STUFF!
What is an author platform? Which elements should it contain? And is any of this stuff more important than just writing another book? Perhaps not. But certain aspects of an author platform are important tools for anyone self-publishing a book, helping you reach readers and, especially, hold on to them.
The topic can be confusing as everyone seems to be mean something different by the term. And then this problem is compounded by a lot of terrible advice proliferating, quite frankly. Number-chasing nonsense which doesn’t serve anyone.
Even the term “platform” seems to be quite nebulous and elastic — fertile ground for snake-oil salesmen. Let’s nail that down first.

## Author Platform – A Definition
Everyone will agree a website is part of an author platform, as well as any blog and your various presences on all the different social media channels, if applicable. But what about your email list? Personally, I think it’s most useful to be open here.
An author platform is a writer’s collective presence on the internet.
That seems pretty straight forward and uncontroversial. Where opinions diverge is with regard to what an author platform is truly for, and what it should contain. And people often skip over the first part of that and jump right to the second. But it’s hard to know if you’re building the right tool if you don’t know what it will be used for.
There are many ways to slice this onion. Primarily, though, author platforms:
- entice new readers; and
- engage existing ones.
You might assume author platforms are largely for finding new readers, whereas I’d strongly argue that their real value is in engaging existing readers, and deepening connections with people we have already sold books to, or otherwise interacted with. More on that in a moment.
The internet is a big place and you can’t be everywhere, not if you want to keep producing books regularly — which should always be your main goal. So, what should you focus on? Which social networks can be dispensed with? How can you build a platform worthy of the name with what little time you have?
To put a finer point on it, is any of this worth the bloody effort? Social media networks in particular are giant time-sinks, as we all know only too well. *closes eleventeen tabs*

## Non-Negotiable Elements of an Author Platform
The only truly necessary elements in an author platform are a website and a mailing list. Everything else is optional. I’d also strongly argue that a basic presence on Facebook, at minimum, is very useful indeed, but we’ll get to that in a moment.
But, really, the only absolutely essential thing to have is a website where readers can find basic information about you and your books, and also sign up to your mailing list. And it’s actually the latter that’s the truly crucial part. Everything else is secondary.
My guide to author websites is here: Level Up Your Author HQ
And this is by far the best resource on email: Book of the Year: Newsletter Ninja
But which other elements might an effective author platform contain? Before you can answer that, you must think about what a platform is truly for and what you, in particular, want to achieve.

## How About Sales?
Sales are good! I like making money. But author platforms aren’t as good at driving sales as people often assume. If you want to sell books, I strongly recommend adopting the killer strategies from this post: How To Sell Books in 2019.
The real value in an author platform is in deepening connections with readers. And the danger for anyone building a platform is that they can try and build a sales-generating apparatus when they should really be building a connection-building contraption.
Email is a classic example. It’s not a sales tool. Wait, scratch that. It’s an awesome sales tool. But you shouldn’t approach it that way or you will come across in the wrong manner. You should look at it as a way to creating real, authentic, and meaningful engagement with your readers.
If you are genuine, and not just faking it, then regular communication with your readers in this manner can turn your email list into a sales generating machine. It’s a by-product of having an open, healthy, and meaningful relationship with your readers. Or creating community, if you prefer that formulation.

## Author Platforms and Social Media
You might think this view of an author platform leaves out a lot of stuff — and it does. Deliberately. You don’t need to be on Facebook. It’s not essential that you have a Twitter following. You don’t have to have an Instagram account. And it’s certainly not a necessary condition for success that you be active on Pinterest or anywhere else for that matter too.
That’s not to say that social networks can’t be incredibly useful, they just aren’t imperatives.
Of course, it can be wise to invest time into building a presence at any social network where your target audience hangs out — or at the very least to be passively available on these networks if that’s where readers wish to connect with you. But I want to remove some of the pressure from the equation as some authors spread themselves far to thin, or berate themselves for not “maximizing the opportunities for exposure on LinkedIn” or whatever’s trending this week.
I think authors should take the opposite approach, in fact.
Instead of asking what you can do for Twitter, ask what Twitter can do for you. Rather than wondering how much time you should invest in Instagram, question whether your readers are truly active there, and if putting more effort into that specific venue is the smartest way to grow that audience further.
For example, newer writers often ask questions like “Should I have a blog?” when it’s completely the wrong way to approach this.
A better way for them to frame that question might be “Will I be actively using content marketing as part of my strategy to reach and retain readers?” And even when the answer is in the affirmative, usually something like Facebook or email (in particular) is a better tool to achieve those goals.
That’s not to say blogs don’t have uses of course, he says on his blog. I’m obviously a huge fan of blogging. I enjoy it and it helps me achieve my particular goals. Just keep in mind that my needs aren’t necessarily your needs. Or in any way typical either. *gnaws pterodactyl drumstick*

Let’s say you have a basic website and newsletter sign-up in place, and are focusing primarily on producing new books, what should you do with any time left over?
There are often periods in the day (evening for me) when you aren’t physically tired per se but you might be creatively zapped after several hours in the word-mines. This can be a good time to catch up with some platform building tasks; there are always a few things I can do which don’t require as much brainpower or headspace as writing fiction.
So, assuming you have the must-haves set up, and your priorities straight, where should you spend your remaining time?
Once you have removed the pressure from your platform to be (primarily) a sales-boosting gizmo, and instead approach it as something you are going to use to deepen relationships with readers (whether that’s current readers or potential ones), that clears some of the mental fog surrounding this issue.
I was speaking this morning with an author who doesn’t see the point of being active on Instagram as she doesn’t think her Ideal Reader uses it. And you know what? That’s an excellent reason to skip Instagram. But, as I said to her, if she wrote PNR or NA or Contemporary Romance, it might be different.
You can approach most social channels the same way, whether that’s Snapchat, LinkedIn, Pinterest, or Twitter. Are your readers active there? Is it somewhere you can reach them? If so, is it worth, at the very least, being passively present so they can connect with you?
Being passively there doesn’t take very much effort, and will give you a sense of whether it’s worth devoting more time to actively building up a real presence there. It will also give you a sense of whether that’s something you would actually enjoy doing — a rather important part of the equation.
One particular channel is different though.

The biggest social media network on the planet has had a torrid time in the press over the last couple of years, leading to many high-profile departures and calls for boycotts. However, key metrics don’t seem that affected: Facebook still had 2.32 billion monthly active users as of the latest figures I saw (31 December 2018). This was an increase on the previous quarter, in case anyone thinks it’s trending downwards.
Even more telling: 1.15 billion of those users log in daily; again this figure is up 9% year-on-year. In other words, it’s not just where your readers might be, it’s where everyone’s readers are every single day. The only real exception might be among the younger demographic, and those related genres mentioned above. You can reach that segment via alternatives like Instagram, and the following mostly applies.
Back to Facebook.
I think the same winning principles for email are relevant to social media too — the likes of Facebook is a wonderful tool for deepening relationships with existing readers and enticing potential readers to check out your work. And the great thing is you achieve both goals in the same way: by regularly sharing content that your target audience enjoys. That content acts both as a magnet for new readers and sticky-paper for existing ones.
Just don’t fall into the trap of sharing content that is enjoyed by a general audience. It’s easy to post cat videos and dank memes, and hoover up the resulting likes and shares. But that will attract (and retain) a generalist audience. You don’t want that. You need a niche audience — one specifically interested in your niche. This means sharing content that only that audience will enjoy. And if that repels everyone else, then that’s a good thing.
You need to divest yourself of the old broadcast model of promotion, of highway billboards and radio announcements and TV ad spots… and number-chasing. That model doesn’t work on social media and it won’t work for you. It’s easy to fall for the Million Follower Fallacy.
Instead, think of yourself more like a laser beam; spread yourself too thin and you’ll lose all power. You need to be focused.
The very first step with Facebook is to have an enticing page that people will actually want to Like. Here’s my guide: How To Make A Pretty Facebook Page
There is a lot more you can do with Facebook, of course, even aside from the giant topic of advertising. If you want more on using Facebook as a content marketing channel and building up a tightly focused group of Likes that are exclusively interested in your niche, read this email I sent to my list last year: Content Marketing With Facebook
By the way, that email is part of an ongoing series on Facebook that I’m doing with my newsletter. Sign up here if you don’t want to miss the rest (you’ll also get access to previous episodes!).

## Author Platform Takeaways
As a writer, you need tools to reach readers, of course, but you must work hard to retain them also. Book advertising is by far the most effective tool for reaching new eyeballs en masse. And email is easily the best at retention.
However, social channels can be very effective at the latter and pretty helpful with the former as well, particularly those social networks with viable advertising options like Facebook, as you will get all sorts of symbiotic benefits. For example, Facebook Ads generate spillover Likes, and growing your Likes makes advertising on Facebook easier and more effective.
A basic author platform, when pared back to the author essentials, only really needs to consist of a website and a mailing list, and you should consider the latter a vehicle for deepening relationships with readers, rather than viewing it primarily as a sales tool. (And it will be much more effective at generating sales if you take this approach.)
I’d also strongly recommend throwing at least one social channel into the mix — and Facebook is the obvious candidate, given both its ubiquity and also its power as an advertising channel, although there are alternatives.
Most important of all: don’t do anything if it makes you miserable. Any antipathy (or inauthenticity, for that matter) will shine through. If you’re not enjoying it, there’s no point. Or in the words of the great Swedish philosopher Roxette, listen to your heart.

## One last thing…
I hope you enjoyed this post! I just wanted to let you know that I send out exclusive content every Friday to my mailing list subscribers.
I talk about the latest tricks with Facebook Ads or BookBub Ads, I also get into topics like content marketing, reader targeting, and everything else under the sun that pertains to building audience and reaching readers.
By signing up to my list, you get access to the all the old emails too, as well as sneak previews of upcoming books (meaning you get the jump on the latest tricks strategies of everyone else), and exclusive discounts too.
You also get a FREE copy of Following – a book that you can’t get anywhere else! I strongly recommend that you join over ten thousand authors and sign up today because there are all sorts of bonuses you will enjoy.

--------------------------

BookBub Ads Expert Is Here To Help
Posted by David Gaughran 17 May 2021. Marketing, Resources • 21 Comments.

BookBub Ads Expert is here! You can download it right now from all retailers for just $4.99. A bargain at twice the price, says you.
Amazon USA | Other Retailers/International
Everything I know about BookBub Ads is in this book – I’m not trying to sell you a course or a webinar or anything like that; it’s all here. In fact, I’m doing the opposite, and giving you lots of extra stuff too. More on that in a moment, as well as news of a huge sale on my other writer books – and you’ll especially want to pick up Superfans at this price, as it’s the perfect companion and has never been discounted before.
First, some real talk. Many people try BookBub Ads and fail. There is a learning curve – no doubt about that. If you tried the platform without adequately preparing, and without knowing how the system works, you probably got cleaned out. I still have scars from my first time. Emotional and physical!
But it doesn’t have to be like that. With BookBub Ads Expert, you will:
- Create attractive ad images to turn browsers into buyers.
- Optimize your targeting to attracting the right readers.
- Manage your bids effectively to drive more sales for less money.
- Learn when to run your BookBub campaigns for maximum impact.
- Boost discovery of your books and improve visibility.
- Train the retailers to recommend your books to the right customers.
- Turbocharge series sales to dominate the charts with multiple books simultaneously. 
BookBub Ads Expert will show you a whole range of uses for Bookbub Ads, from supporting a launch or reviving backlist, to boosting a permafree, creating an international audience, or pushing an entire series at once. And there’s also lots of ninja tricks and killer moves to take your ad game to the next level.
But that’s not all, he says, with a flourish. There’s extras too:

All purchasers of BookBub Ads Expert get a link to a private part of this website which is filled with bonus resources – all free. You’ll get:
- a gallery of winning BookBub Ad images in all genres;
- a step-by-step guide to ad creation with lots of important tips;
- detailed optimization advice, with lots of screenshots, so you know what to tweak, and what to aim for; and,
- lots more resources that you will find useful: graphics tools, 3D cover generators, ROI calculators, and all sorts of posts and case studies on BookBub Ads best practices.
It’s a really useful add-on, it’s all free with the book, and I’ll keep adding stuff too. Just today, for example, I added lots of information on Also Boughts, as many people are worried that Amazon is fiddling with them again, along with some alternative ways to unearth those comp authors if your Also Boughts are gone. Plus there’s a space for you to ask questions and get help.
This is the most comprehensive resource available for BookBub Ads, one which will help you master what has become my favorite advertising platform. And it’s available for just $4.99. Pick up your copy today!
? NEW RELEASE ?BookBub Ads Expert is here ??? And you can also pick up my other writer books at a huge discount. Level up your author business today!? Download now (ALL RETAILERS): https://t.co/2CcSKrd3Wq
March 1, 2019
Finally, as many of you beautiful people have been asking, you can help spread the good news about BookBub Ads Expert – and the accompanying sale – by sharing this post using the handy buttons below, retweeting the above tweet, and by sharing this Facebook post in particular.
? NEW RELEASE ?BookBub Ads Expert is here ??? And you can also pick up my other writer books at a huge discount. Level up your author business today!? Download now (all retailers):
David Gaughran
Friday, March 1, 2019
It would be greatly appreciated! And for those who have already started the book, I’d love to hear what you think.

--------------------------

Level Up Your Author Website With GoCreate.Me
Posted by David Gaughran 4 March 2021. Marketing, Resources • 14 Comments.

Your author website us an increasingly important tool, but one that can cause a lot of aggravation. While most people have a handle on the basic set-up needed, they can quickly run into issues when trying to level up; these days your Author HQ needs to be slicker than the cobbled together afterthought we got away with a few years ago.
There are a bunch of solutions out there, but most aren’t fit for purpose in one way or another — either too expensive, overly complex, or just not attuned to the specific needs of the modern writer.
GoCreate.Me addresses all these problems with a selection of free and premium themes designed specifically for authors. I’m using one of their themes here at DavidGaughran.com myself and it is wonderful — with so much cool stuff going on at the back-end which will make your life easier. And it’s just plain nice to use, which is big for me after previous struggles. These days, I only use WordPress themes which spark joy.
I have a big breakdown below of what I think an author needs today from a website, before explaining how Parallax for Writers from GoCreate.Me helps me tackle all that. Some of you won’t need all that detail though, so here’s the meat:
- 2017 For Writers is the free theme. It’s not so-named for its age but because it’s a child theme based off the WordPress in-house Twenty Seventeen theme. You can check it out here where all the features are explained and there is even a helpful video showing you the theme in action
- Parallax for Writers is the showstopper. This premium theme costs $599 for a lifetime license and that INCLUDES installation. I have a custom version of it powering DavidGaughran.com at the moment and I do love it so.
- GoCreate.Me was set up by indie author Caro Bégin — who works in multiple genres under several names, and gets all the various requirements that different writers have. She’s also a WordPress expert, a pleasure to deal with, and possibly some kind of sorcerer; I’m not exactly sure.
Parallax for Writers
If you are sold already, check out the links above, or you can book an installation slot directly here.

When I started self-publishing, author websites had limited use. I know one particular self-publisher who didn’t even have a website until he had sold half a million books. Websites were essentially viewed as a kind of online business card — some limited info about you and your books. Maybe a contact form. If the writer in question was a real self-starter, there was a blog… which inevitably fell into disrepair after a few rudderless posts.
All that has changed.
I wrote about the increasingly important role that author websites play in a newsletter a while back. As I said there:
This is your Author HQ, on a domain you control, and at minimum it should have some basic information about you and your books, along with links to where they are on sale, and — most important of all — an effective way of collecting readers’ email addresses. Any other presence you have scattered around the web should point back to this Author HQ.
A good Author HQ can fulfill a number of roles today. It’s still a place for readers to find out more information about you and your books, but can do all this stuff too:
- Optimized squeeze pages for newsletter sign-ups
- SEO-boosted blogging architecture for content marketing
- Book-specific landing pages with geo-redirects to global retailers
- Pixel tracking for Facebook ad custom audience remarketing
- Smart follow buttons for social media platforms
- Private areas with bonus resources for book purchasers
- Customizable temporary promo pages optimized for conversion
- Responsive layouts which are viewable on any device
But how do you get that all set up? What’s the best way to go about it?
To get the most options in terms of features and customization and ease of use, you really have to go with WordPress. It’s #1 for a reason. Some people like alternatives like Wix and Squarespace, and while they might appeal to those looking for a more drag-and-drop approach, I think going for WordPress and a self-hosted set-up will stand to you over time, even if there is a bit more of a learning curve.
You can start with the simpler, free version at WordPress.com if you prefer, but ultimately you will want to transition to self-hosted WordPress to get the full feature set, access to lots of cool plug-ins, and a much bigger (and better) selection of themes.

This is usually where we start reaching for the turpentine. There are just so many and choosing one can be impossible. I’ve made several missteps on this front. For example, I bought a highly rated theme a few years ago — the X Theme — which had more features than an archive of Sunday papers. And every time I tried to build the most basic page it would leave me clawing my face in despair. It was just so complicated — and this is coming from someone who knows a little HTML.
The end result is that I built the most basic website possible, never incorporated my popular blog (that was still mooching around over at WordPress.com) and missed out on quite a few marketing strategies because I was just too frustrated with my website to tackle it, quite frankly.
It’s hard to find a good theme. None of them — until recently, at least — seemed designed with authors in mind, or could comfortably be adapted for our purposes without running into a wall (usually when you had the least capacity to deal with it). And there are just so many themes.
Even if you go to a recommended site like ThemeForest, you’re still going to be faced with over 40,000 themes. How can you possibly find something suitable? You’ll probably make the same mistake I did: look for something recommended and hope for the best.
Yeah. Doesn’t always work out, let me tell you. Which meant I was delighted when Caro Bégin told me she was working on some WordPress themes which would be designed from the ground up, specifically for authors. She approached me and a bunch of other self-publishers to get feedback on the themes, and also to see what kind of features we would like incorporated, what kind of needs we had, and so on. Because everyone runs their business a little differently and requirements vary a lot.
The end result — Parallax for Writers — has allowed me to revolutionize my Author HQ, and has given more than enough space for future growth too. Let me point out some of my favorite features, and explain why they are important and why this theme does them so well.

- Responsiveness. The majority of traffic is now mobile which means you simply must optimize for mobile devices. This means having a responsive theme. You can see how responsive Parallax for Writers is by viewing this site on various devices, or simply manually making your browser window smaller. You’ll see it scales beautifully and is perfectly navigable at any screen size with menus that adapt for mobile also. If you don’t have a responsive theme, you’ll lose over half your customers. This is non-negotiable.
- Killer Book Pages. I don’t need to tell you how important this is. I personally wanted something which placed the book covers front-and-centre. Could handle links to all the retailers without looking messy. And something we just looked pro — I think book pages often look messy on author websites. I love what Caro did here. Here’s an example of what my non-[fiction pages](https://davidgaughran.com/books/strangers-to-superfans-marketing-guide-the-reader-journey/) look like. And here’s an example of what my fiction pages look like — the latter have things like excerpts while I didn’t want those for non-fiction. It’s really simple for me to add new books or edit any of the old info too, or put in a nice review quote. I can also put in series information at the top so readers can click on that to jump to the related titles further down. If I decide to enter Kindle Unlimited, I can nix the other links with a couple of clicks. And then if I want to add new retailers, or more formats, that’s a doddle too. Oh, and the best part: if someone clicks on one of those Amazon links, for example, the website will detect their location and direct them to the appropriate Amazon store globally AND insert the requisite affiliate link for that local store. Pretty nifty. (That’s Amazon OneLink by the way, which can be incorporated in any site, with a little fiddling.)
- Optimized Squeeze Pages. Having an effective way to capture reader emails is arguably the most important task a modern author website has. And so many are bad at it, quite frankly. (Mine was terrible for years.) Not anymore! This page is pretty much perfectfor capturing emails from my non-fiction crowd. The sign-up bonus is front-and-center. All the text is easily customizable, including the red button. Everything is above the fold and focusing reader attention on that sign-up box. The other elements of the site — like the nav bar or the footer or the sidebar — are stripped away, not just to focus that attention but also so there are no clickaways. Well, except for the Privacy Policy, which is mandated by our new GDPR overlords. But hey, you might object, what if it’s a slightly colder audience which mightn’t be totally convinced they want to sign up yet, and I don’t want to send them to such a spare page? Easily solved. I can just direct them to this page instead, or build a custom, private page in a few minutes (genuinely that simple, I just built one the other day).
- Customizable Home Pages. To show you how different I can make my home page look — even while keeping the same/similar branding that I use in the fiction and non-fiction halves of my business — check out the difference between my non-[fiction homepage](https://davidgaughran.com) and my fiction homepage. The former is a bit more sales-y so I wanted a personal message up top to soften that a little. That’s actually a slot for a slideshow though, so if you wanted something to showcase various books or series in that space instead, you can do that too — as you can see from my fiction website. Note: that fiction site is a little sparse at the moment, but I’m focusing on that side of my business this year so big changes will be coming there too.
non-fiction pages
fiction pages
This page is pretty much perfect
this page instead
non-fiction homepage
fiction homepage

Please note that I’m running a custom version of Parallax for Authors. There are certain things built in to my particular website that aren’t included with the theme. For example, DavidGaughran.com is essentially two separate websites under the same tent, and that’s not a standard feature. My fiction domain is actually DavidGaughranBooks.com and that redirects to a separate half of this website.
There are very few links between the two halves of my site because I want it that way, for Also Bought reasons and so on; they are two distinct audiences with no natural crossover anyway. But this split also allows me to do other cool things, like have two different Facebook Pixels for each half of my website. Facebook Pixel tracking is built into the Parallax for Authors theme, just not the capacity to handle two — although that’s a pretty niche requirement.
More of you may require a blog though, and there are some key differences I should point out there — as my needs were quite different to the average author, given the sheer volume of content on this site, and the amount of traffic both feeding in every day, and the levels it can spike to when something goes viral.
I’ve made that great seething mass of content much more discoverable by categorizing all posts and making those categories easy to navigate via icons and tags and crisp buttons scattered hither and tither. A cool feature, no doubt, but not one bundled with the regular version of Parallax for Authors, and not one that 99% of you will need, quite frankly.
Some of my favorite new blogging toys aren’t custom features though — they come from using a free plugin called Yoast, which I can’t believe I went so long without using. It analyzes posts on the fly for SEO optimization, and nudges you to fiddle with titles and sub-headings and HTML slugs until you are maximizing the discoverability of each post on Google. I’m already seeing a difference on that front.
Yoast will also optimize social sharing too. If you drop one of these posts on Facebook, a special preview image tailored for that platform will be used, and I can have a custom headline and description too, if I wish. But if you drop one of these posts on Twitter, a different sized image will be used there, one more tailored for Twitter. Again, I can have a different headline and description there, if so desired. All very powerful stuff.
But back to the theme. If you want to see how the regular blogging set-up looks, check out Pete Bauer’s blog (and his website is here if you want to just see how the theme looks with different branding again). Just note that Pete has gone for quite a minimal blog look to fit with his branding, but you can populate the sidebars like I have, if you prefer, in the usual WordPress way. Just for completeness, the bloggy parts of my homepage are also custom to my site, but then most of you won’t care anyway — my reasons for needing that are relatively unique, and if you want a section on your homepage for news or upcoming events or whatever, you can do that easily.
Maybe a couple more examples of the theme in action will be useful. Here is the website of Sarah Woodbury, who has adapted the theme with a nice historical vibe to reflect her work. And here is Cidney Swanson’s website, with her branding reflecting her work in speculative YA of various shades.
I’ve only talked about some of the features I like most. I didn’t even tell you how you can customize the 404 pages so that if someone hits a broken link, you don’t totally lose them.
To see the full, considerable feature set and specifications, check out the page on GoCreate.Me for more. As I said up top, the price is $599, which includes installation, and as part of that process, Caro will work with you to get fonts and branding suitable for you site nailed down.
In case you need more convincing, here’s a video from GoCreate.Me walking you through the theme. I’ll leave you with that while I go prep for a launch…

--------------------------

Book of the Year for Authors: Newsletter Ninja
Posted by David Gaughran 29 January 2021. Marketing, Resources • 16 Comments.

My book of the year is Newsletter Ninja by Tammi Labrecque. It has wonderful things to teach authors at any stage of their career; it helped to revolutionize mine.
This is a febrile time of year. The sins of the old year are washed away, and the ambitions of the new are laid out. It’s a clean slate, a fresh start, a time to gather stones together. It’s also a time when people like to review the year gone by and make predictions for the next.
I won’t poke that particular hornet’s nest, let’s just say there has been a fair amount of tumult. I remember saying a few years ago that chaos was the new normal and that people shouldn’t expect things to settle down any time soon — at least one prediction that has both aged well and remained evergreen.
I’m not one for fretting about the future, but I definitely am one for preparing. And the best insurance policy against any seismic changes in our industry is to have a large group of engaged readers which you regularly communicate with through a platform you control.
I knew this, and I still screwed it up. But I stopped screwing it up in 2018 and Newsletter Ninja is the reason why.
Please note that this is a somewhat biased recommendation. Here’s what I said when speaking about Newsletter Ninja a few months ago:
Disclosure: Tammi edited Digital 3 and Superfans, but I asked Tammi to edit those books because she knows her sh*t inside out and is a literal ninja.
I also wrote the foreword to this book, which Tammi has kindly allowed me to reprint here. And the reason why I wrote the foreword, and the many, many reasons why you should buy this book, will become very clear once you read the excerpt below — so thank you Tammi for letting me do that.
Before we get into it, I should mention that you can buy Newsletter Ninja from. And you really, really should. Here’s, erm, me with more:
I’ve been self-publishing for seven years. That’s quite a long period to be screwing up almost the entire time, but I managed it! My whole approach to email was backwards. I did all the don’ts, ignored all the warnings, missed out on so many opportunities to build myself a happy and engaged audience of readers that it causes me literal pain when I think about it. I don’t say this to elicit sympathy. Rather, I hope that my long experience of doing exactly the wrong things can act as a deterrent—a giant sign made of bones spelling out “Here Be Wolves.”
What did I do exactly? I only emailed people when I had a new release. I thought I was being considerate and not clogging up everyone’s inboxes when, in reality, I was only turning up at their door when I wanted something: their money. This was compounded by my slow production speed, particularly with those painstakingly researched historical novels I seem to enjoy writing for some reason. That problem was further exacerbated by working in more than one genre, so the books came out even slower and the emails were even less frequent. Clearly, I felt I wasn’t antagonizing my most loyal readers enough with this set-up, so I decided to have one Frankenlist—my fiction and non-fiction peeps all lumped together—neatly ensuring that everyone really wouldn’t care about at least 50% of the (increasingly infrequent) messages I was sending out.
Yeah, I was officially Bad At Email.
There were more insidious effects too. Deep down I knew I was Bad At Email, but instead of this manifesting in some change of tack, I retreated into myself. Messages became less personal. I lacked confidence—dreading launch day instead of getting a thrill of anticipation when hitting my list. Because I knew I’d see a continuation of several disturbing trends: falling opens, reduced clicks, less conversions, increasingly tepid engagement, and then people unsubscribing or marking the email as spam as the final kick in the teeth. How did I get here? And how did I climb out of that hole?

## The article starts below, but first: FREE STUFF!
I started listening to Tammi, is the short version. She started teaching a course on email and I was one of the first people to sign up. Yes, I was at least partly motivated by wanting to support a friend, but Tammi sounded like she knew her stuff and I was beginning to accept that I needed to radically change my approach. I had already taken one important step: I had separated those fiction and non-fiction readers. But I didn’t really know what to do next, and I was hoping I’d get some ideas from Tammi’s course.
Eh, yeah.
Within a month I had started a brand-new mailing list with a five-part automated onboarding sequence, during which I doled out my custom-written reader magnet which was getting rave reviews. I had pivoted to a weekly newsletter approach and weeded out the dead weight on my old list, and open and click rates were climbing.
Within two months I had launched my first book to these new readers, and it hung out at the top of the charts for a considerable time. My newsletter subscribers were responding in greater numbers than ever because my “ask” (and a new release is still an “ask” because you are looking for their money!) came after a string of “gives” for a change.
Within six months I had re-energized my existing non-fiction list and had a brand-new list containing thousands of new readers— passionate and engaged and loyal subscribers who not only opened and clicked but actually looked forward to getting my emails. I know this because they email me and tell me! I can’t explain to you what this means to me, how much I have been reinvigorated by this. My whole career feels like it has been rebooted, and I look to the future with confidence rather than trepidation. I get a tingle again every time I hit my list.
I don’t know where you are in your career or whether you have made all these mistakes too. If you are just at the beginning of your journey, you have the chance here to do things right from the start. But if you have screwed things up as badly as me, I want to give you the confidence that you can turn things around—remarkably quickly too. Even quicker if you haven’t ticked every box on the Giant List O’Mistakes!
So, just listen to Tammi, learn how to put value in every single email, and start building a passionate list of engaged readers. I wish I did it years ago.
Buy Newsletter Ninja from Amazon.

--------------------------

Clever Tips For Using BookBub Ads
Posted by David Gaughran 17 May 2021. Marketing • 2 Comments.

I have some expert BookBub Ads tips for you today from BookBub’s own Carlyn Robertson.
For me, BookBub is the platform where I’ve seen most growth in the last year, to the point where it is rivaling Facebook, especially when factoring in conversion. The amount of money I can spend effectively on BookBub — and by that I mean get an immediate return on investment — has quadrupled in the last twelve months.
This might sound incredible, in the literal sense, to anyone who hasn’t cracked BookBub Ads yet. It can be an unusual platform for those more used to Facebook or Amazon Ads, leading to an unexpected learning curve, perhaps. But I find that if you take the time to understand what works on BookBub, it’s the most responsive and consistent ad platform out there. Getting over that first hump is where many authors seem to struggle though. I know that from running an eight-part series on BookBub Ads to my mailing list earlier this year.
Well, there’s help on the way. I’ll have a book called BookBub Ads Expert coming very soon — make sure to sign up to my list to hear about that first and get an exclusive launch discount that will be offered nowhere else — and I have a wonderful guest post today to give you a headstart while you’re waiting for that.
If you have attended any major writer conference in America over the last couple of years, you will probably have encountered Carlyn Robertson and her BookBub colleagues — who spend a lot of time understanding author’s needs and taking feedback. She has a very useful guest post for you today which is filled with high-level insights and actionable takeaways.
Here’s Carlyn with more:
The BookBub Ads platform is the most flexible marketing tool BookBub offers right now — it gives advertisers the ability to target narrow, customized audiences of active BookBub readers, to run promotions entirely on their own schedules, and to have complete control over their costs and budgets. This flexibility means that you can use BookBub Ads to supplement any kind of promotion or marketing initiative.
David has discussed how he uses BookBub Ads to tactically support launches and other promotions when he needs a last-minute, sure-fire boost in sales, so we wanted to share some additional ways authors are successfully using BookBub Ads to support different marketing goals and sell more books.

A new book is a chance to both re-engage your current fan base and to introduce new readers to your work, so new release launches are often an important time to make big marketing investments. BookBub now offers several marketing tools dedicated to new release promotion, and many authors have made BookBub Ads part of their launch plans. You can use Ads to promote your book throughout the launch period and personalize your messaging to target existing fans or hook new readers.
To reach existing fans, you can target yourself with BookBub Ads. Unlike other ad platforms, nearly every author with published ebooks is available to select as an ad target on BookBub. This audience includes not only your BookBub followers, but any readers who have interacted with you on our platform, whether by visiting your profile or clicking on one of your books in an email. If you’ve run a Featured Deal before, this means you can retarget any readers who clicked on that deal to tell them about your new release.
You can also target the fans of similar authors with BookBub Ads, which is a fantastic opportunity to reach a relevant audience of new readers who are highly likely to be interested in your books. To find comp authors, many authors look at their also-boughts on retailers, study trends in their genres, or even ask their readers for suggestions. We recommend searching for your potential targets on BookBub.com to confirm that they have a large enough audience on our platform. You can also browse popular BookBub authors by genre [here](https://www.bookbub.com/discover-authors?feed=popular&page=1) (note that this page won’t display any authors you’re already following on BookBub!). You can find additional tips from a number of successful advertisers on choosing and assessing comp author targets here.
CD Reiss targeted both her own fans and the fans of similar authors for the launch of a second book in a duet, using different strategies to appeal to each audience.
The ad on the left targeted CD Reiss fans on BookBub during the last four days before the book’s launch. The copy — “How will the game end?” — appeals to readers who have already read book one and are dying to know what happens next, and the launch date further builds anticipation and entices them to preorder. The ad on the right targeted fans of CD Reiss and fans of a number of comp authors she’d tested during the launch of book one. It was meant to appeal to readers who were either waiting for the duet to be completed before purchasing or hadn’t heard of the books before and would want to start at the beginning with book one. Both of these ad campaigns had over a 3% CTR.
Lauren Blakely used BookBub Ads to support her launch of Mister O, which hit multiple bestseller lists in its first three months after publication. Lauren was more focused on exposure than ROI, so she targeted broadly, set a high CPM bid, and invested her budget on ads with high CTRs. She reached thousands of readers with this campaign and drove sales for her new book at $3.99.
The ad on the left was targeted to just her own fans, and drove 1,400 clicks at a 4.9% CTR. The ad on the right was targeted to her own fans plus those of 34 comp authors, generating over 5,000 clicks at a 1.3% CTR.

## Gaining Marketing Insights During Preorder Periods
One of the best times to run A/B tests for an upcoming release is during the preorder period. Preorders can be a tougher sell for new readers, but you can still gain valuable insights by comparing the CTRs of different ad images among different comp authors’ fans. Once you know what images and targets deliver the best results, you can invest your budget in those ads as soon as the book is live and hit the ground running.
Jules Barnard ran tests during her preorder of Tempting Levi with a goal of simply breaking even rather than driving a positive ROI. She used this time to figure out which ad designs and copy would drive the most engagement among new-to-her audiences so she was prepared to ramp up her spend on the most effective ads during launch week. Her ads were one part of a larger marketing plan that helped her hit the USA Today list with this book.
Jules found that “less was more” in her ad designs. The image on the left had a CTR below 2%, which didn’t meet her goals. She was much happier with the performance of the image on the right, which earned a CTR above 3%.

## Gaining Branding Insights
Ads allow you to gain practical marketing insights that can inform future ad campaigns, but they can also provide big-picture branding insights.
We hosted a panel on preorder promotion at BookExpo featuring marketers from top traditional publishing houses, and one takeaway was they consider their preorder periods testing grounds for marketing copy. Ads help them determine which elements of a book are resonating with readers the most — and they were often surprised! These insights allowed them to shift gears in their promotional plans to adjust to the signals readers were sending and to better align with their preferences before launch. And at RWA, indie author Skye Warren said she’ll even change her book descriptions if new ad copy outperforms an ad using quotes from her existing description.
BookBub Ads are particularly efficient for running tests because they start serving right away and report results within the hour. But you can test more than just ad designs or blurbs—Tricia O’Malley used BookBub Ads to A/B test her covers! Her goal was to see how the fans of authors whose readers she wanted to acquire responded to new cover designs before updating her series. She ran five rounds of tests, investing $20 to $40 in each test ad, and has already seen a 40% increase in downloads of book 1 after switching to the winning cover design.

## Stacking Promotions for Discounts to Hit Bestseller Lists
As David’s written about before, BookBub Ads are excellent for promoting discounts. BookBub readers are always on the hunt for new books, and discounts are an extremely effective way to hook new readers to your brand — 95% of BookBub readers have purchased a book from an author they hadn’t heard of before because of a discount.
Andrew Watts supplemented a $0.99 Featured Deal with a BookBub Ads campaign and other promotions to hit the USA Today list for the first time. He ran low-budget tests in the lead-up to the feature.
In his tests, the image on the right performed 40% better than the one on the left. Andrew started running this ad before the Featured Deal and continued throughout the promotion week. He used a high CPM bid to reach as many readers as possible, since his goal was unit sales rather than ROI.

## Continually Promoting a First-in-Series
Promoting the first book in a series to readers who haven’t heard of you before can be a really effective way to introduce new readers to your brand. It’s also easier to run profitable ads for books in a series because advertising the first book usually results in sales of the rest of the series, too. This increases the value of the readers you acquire, which in turn increases the amount you can afford to pay to acquire them.
Continuous ads offer authors the ability to set a low daily budget and run ads on an ongoing basis, driving consistent clicks and sales to a series. Eva Pohler used a continuous BookBub Ads campaign to promote her $3.99 first-in-series in the lead-up to the launch of the 3rd book in the series. With a budget of $10 per day, she doubled the daily sales of book 1 from 2-3 to 5 or more and increased sales of books 2 and 3.
Eva targeted her ad to her own fans as well as the fans of 20 similar authors. She set a high CPC bid ($2/ click) to ensure her campaign would be competitive in the auction, but ended up paying far less than that on average ($0.65/ click). She ran this continuous campaign for over a month, and including the revenue from series sell-through, it remained ROI-positive during that time.

## Final Takeaways and Trends
There are a few things all of these successful campaigns had in common that you should keep in mind when setting up your own ads.

### 1. Design custom creative
We provide a simple template to build your ad creative directly in the ad set-up form, but well-designed personalized ad images tend to drive higher click-through rates. As you can see from the above examples, clean and simple with just a few elements tends to work best! You can easily design your own ad images using free graphic design tools like Canva or Book Brush. For further inspiration, check out some engaging BookBub Ads designs here.

### 2. Target readers based on author interest for high CTRs
Choosing the right author targets is key to generating clicks and sales from your ads. Category targeting alone is usually far too broad to achieve a positive ROI, but if you’re targeting authors who write across multiple genres, you can combine category and author targeting to narrow your audience to only the most relevant readers. You can find some tips from successful advertisers on identifying author targets here.

### 3. Clearly identify and prioritize your goals
If you want to maximize sales or exposure, you may have to sacrifice ROI. If you want a positive ROI, you may have to sacrifice scale and target a narrower audience. If you want to run certain tests or gain particular insights, you may have to sacrifice sales — for example, testing different cover designs could impact conversion rates if readers click through and see a different cover on the retailer. However, if you know what you’re trying to accomplish with your ads, you can identify the tradeoffs you may have to make and set up your campaigns accordingly.

### 4. Run tests
Running tests is the best way to determine which targets will be most effective for your books and which ad images will encourage readers to click. Use low budgets ($5-10 can be sufficient!) and a high CPM bid when running test ads to win impressions and gain insights as quickly as possible.
Ready to sell some books? Create a new BookBub Ads campaign now! If you have any questions about your own campaigns, feel free to contact the BookBub team at partners@bookbub.com at any time! We’ll be happy to offer advice, tips, and guidance to help you achieve your marketing goals.
Carlyn Robertson works for BookBub’s Partners Team, where she ensures that authors and book marketers know how to use BookBub’s tools to accomplish their marketing goals and effectively promote their books. Follow her on Twitter at @CarlynAtBookBub.

--------------------------

How To Make A Pretty Facebook Page
Posted by David Gaughran 17 May 2021. Marketing, Resources • 4 Comments.

Most web traffic is now mobile, but we can forget that when considering how to make a pretty Facebook Page, leading to ugly header images that are cropped in weird ways — a terrible first impression to prospective new readers.
The tipping point with mobile was probably reached some time in late 2016 or early 2017, yet here we are in 2018, often still optimizing for desktop, when most of our customers are accessing our web pages and viewing our ads on mobile devices of some description — not just phones but tablets of all kinds too.
When I was redesigning this website, I was very conscious of that and made sure it was responsive and looked good for all screen sizes. And that requires more than just the screen resizing and things still being legible and images rendering correctly and buttons still working and navigation remaining intuitive. You also have to think about things like sign-up pages and sidebars too.
One thing that seems to get regularly forgotten about is your Facebook Page. We all understand the importance of having a pretty Facebook Page these days — particularly if you are investing in ever-more-expensive ads, it’s crucial to have an enticing welcome on your Page itself, so you can catch as many “spillover” Likes as possible from your ad spend. Anything that helps with ROI these days is sorely welcome.
Unfortunately, it seems that lots of authors haven’t checked what their Facebook Page looks like on mobile, which can lead to some cropping of that desktop-friendly image. There is contradictory advice out there on how to resolve it, which doesn’t help, and lots of info that is out of date too as Facebook keeps changing the recommended dimensions in an ongoing effort to improve the mobile experience.
I combed through all the advice online and did a bit of testing myself, and put together not just one solution, but two, and you can choose whichever approach suits the image you would like to use—because most sites advise an approach which leads to side-cropped images, when sometimes only a top crop will do.
By the way, the below was sent to my mailing list over the summer, and those lucky ducks have been swanning around with mobile-optimized Facebook Cover Photos for five whole months now, snaffling readers from under your inexpertly cropped noses. If you want to join that crew and get the drop on the latest marketing advice every Friday gratis then sign up here. You get a free book too!
For those of you who are already on my soon-to-be-universally-acclaimed mailing list and feast each Friday on these multifarious marketing morsels, I won’t leave you high-and-dry. You can check out this guest post I did over at the BookBub Partners Blog today — Book Marketing Mistakes You Need To Stop Making. The rest of you can read that in a few minutes. First, scroll down and we’ll give your Facebook Page a quick makeover.
The reason we are starting here is because an enticing Facebook Page will collect Likes for us passively in the background — and these “organic” Likes are some of the best quality Likes you can get, costing nothing too. Also, having a tricked-out Facebook Page will also increase the “free” spillover Likes we get from any advertising, helping with that ever-slippier ROI. Facebook helpfully encourages users to Like advertiser pages in various ways, but you aren’t going to get many spillover Likes if your page looks like this one by my lazy friend, who was in no way invented for this spurious exercise.
Jeremiah No Goode if you ask me! *awkward laughter*
There are a whole variety of ways you can pretty up your Facebook Page and make it enticing to your target audience, but two things are key: engaging content, and a nice Facebook Page Cover Photo (that’s the official term for the banner-like image at the top of your Page). We’ll get into the topic of content marketing another day; here we’ll focus on making a good first impression with a neat, on brand image.

In its continuing mission to keep graphic designers busy, Facebook is always tinkering with image sizes. Compounding this is the rather problematic issue of the plethora of screen sizes out there, and how to serve images on all those different devices without distorting them.
Facebook has made it simple in one sense — we can only upload one image for all these different audiences — but complicated in another as that image will be cropped differently on different devices AND it will either crop the sides or the top/bottom, depending on what shape image we upload.
Confused? Good. That means these images I prepared won’t go to waste!
You will get tons of different answers if you Google something like “Facebook Page Cover Photo Size 2018” — some of which contradict each other and many of which are plain wrong, quite frankly. I’ve done endless testing on this, so I can set you straight. And maybe give you some extra options you didn’t know you had.
Contrary to popular belief, there isn’t just one optimal image size for a Facebook Page Cover, there are two. Facebook will always display a more postcard-shaped image on Mobile and a kind of letterbox shape on Desktop, and it will either crop the top/bottom or the two sides, depending on which image size of those two you choose to upload.
Errrrrr…
I know what you’re thinking (“where’s the whiskey?”) but don’t do what many authors do and just upload a Desktop-friendly image. While it’s tempting to not give a Jerusalem fig what Mobile looks like, that’s also a huge mistake. Most traffic is Mobile now, as that includes all tablets as well as phones, so don’t be lazy here. Some  images can look TERRIBLE on Mobile. You don’t want your first impression to a potential new reader being one of a sloppy-ass mofo who couldn’t be bothered tucking in his shirt and combing his hair. That particular delight can be saved for meatspace.
And this bit of fussiness is actually a godsend, in a way, because you can choose whether you want your image cropped at the top/bottom, or at the sides, so it looks prettiest on all devices. And some images you may wish to use will only be suitable for cropping one way or the other — as I’ll explain shortly with hotly anticipated visual aids.
Plus, I’m going to make this pretty easy for you, so stop grousing. Yes, I can hear you.
I’ll lay out your options and point out what you need to watch out for, and illustrate it all with examples. That should give (or your designer) enough ideas to get going, and you can test it all on a “fake” Facebook Page like I did, if you like. As for the images themselves, getting a pro to do this is very cheap, particularly when getting your covers designed, but you can also fool around yourself Canva. But whether you do it yourself, or outsource, you’ll need to know this stuff, so read on padre.
Facebook officially advises… well the official advice is kind of crap actually. A little misleading, and most definitely incomplete. I vote for ignoring it altogether as it just confuses more than anything. And it completely neglects one of the options here, because, as I said, you have two: the Side Crop, which is the standard approach recommended everywhere, and the Top Crop — which many advice articles miss out on.
For the Side Crop, you need to upload an 828×315 image. That’s what will display on Desktop. Here’s an example from our friend Jeremiah.
While he’s mending his lazy ways, he hasn’t been thorough enough, because you also need to factor Mobile into your design, and, in the above example, a good chunk of those sides will be lopped off. Like so:
Nightmare! Imagine that was your new release or website address or something else really important you needed readers to see? And that’s aside from the fact it looks pretty unprofessional.
So many writers do this. Which is a shame, because it’s not really that complicated once you wrap your head around the idea that you should include no important stuff at the sides as more than half of visitors to your Page won’t see it. Like this:
But hey, I hear you say from the other end of the internet tubes, what if I have an image which I really need to use which has important stuff at the sides? Don’t be mad, Chad. Get ready for the Top Crop!

## The article starts below, but first: FREE STUFF!
You can “trick” Facebook into lopping off the top and bottom instead by upload a slightly different sized image — namely 828×461. And you really might need that option if, for example, you want a new Facebook Cover Photo to celebrate Book 9 of your bestselling series. Just remember to factor where that cropping happens into your design.
Here’s what a Top Crop looks like on mobile — still at 828×461 because this time the cropping happens on Desktop. Notice I put nothing important at the top/bottom this time.
Hey, a gal can dream.
This is what it looks like on Desktop with that cropping in play.
This isn’t the place to get into branding too deeply, but aside from when you are pushing a certain book at launch or promo time perhaps, you should consider having consistent branding across your entire web presence. I’ll give you a real-world example using my own Facebook Page.
This is my Facebook Cover Photo. At least, this is what it looks like on Desktop.
And here is what it looks like on Mobile.
Aaaaaand then this is the homepage of this here website.
I hope these examples help. If you need a handy recap, this is one of the better articles on the optimal size for Facebook Cover Photos and you might get some general branding ideas from this Hubspot article on Cover Photos.
Once you have prettied up your Facebook Page, you are ready to start rolling out organic content to grow your Facebook Likes.
* * *
I send out advice like the above every single Friday to the thousands of authors on my marketing mailing list, where we regularly cover all sorts of marketing topics from newsletter engagement and creating superfans, to launches and relaunches, and advertising on BookBub, Facebook, and AMS. It’s all free, no catch, so if you aren’t signed up, you really should do that here.
And if you haven’t checked out my post over at BookBub, get to it!

--------------------------

7 Ways To Market Children's Books
Posted by David Gaughran 22 January 2022. Marketing • 13 Comments.

Writing a children’s book is tough enough without having to deal with the unique challenge of marketing one too.
There are successful self-publishers in every niche. But authors of children’s books face more challenges than most. Unique obstacles which must be overcome on the production side. And then in terms of reaching readers too.
When I heard Karen Inglis was releasing How To Self-Publish and Market A Children’s Book, I asked about her strategies for overcoming these challenges. Here’s Karen Inglis with more:
I discovered self-publishing back in 2010. It was a dream come true after the familiar cycle of sending out manuscripts only to get a rejection six or seven weeks later. At last I would be able to get my children’s stories out and take the world by storm!
Except, of course, it doesn’t work like that…
As we all know, books don’t sell themselves. Amazon and the other platforms (not to mention bricks and mortar bookshops) won’t sell our books without our help. Of course, a great story, great cover, compelling blurb, appropriate metadata and category selection are all critical to get us off to the right start. However, to introduce and sell your title to your target market – and, crucially, keep it in their line of sight – you also need a robust marketing plan that includes a mix of social media, advertising, email marketing, traditional PR, and (for some more than others) live events.
For authors who just want to be writers, this is a tall order at the best of times. And, for authors of children’s books, it’s even taller…
Why? Because our readers are not book buyers. Oh and they’re not (supposed to be) online.
And we certainly can’t email them without gaining all sorts of permissions from an adult. (I have no problem with this by the way – but it’s important to know.) To boot, if under 13s are stalking us on Facebook or Instagram or Wattpad, which some will do, they certainly don’t hold the credit card that will facilitate the odd impulse purchase!
One more thing to note is that most children under age 12 read in print. Which makes ‘ebook impulse purchases’ (somehow easier to commit to than for print) of children’s books few and far between. Add in the fact that most parents buy based on children’s nagging or other parents’ or school recommendations, then you see that the odds are stacked quite heavily against unknown authors marketing their children’s books. Especially online…
Is all of this this the end of the world? No. Does it make marketing children’s book harder than marketing books for teens and adults? Yes – but it doesn’t make it impossible; you simply need to do a few things differently.
Below I share seven key tips for marketing children’s books most of which I have tried and tested and most of which have worked well for me. The last is still a work-in-progress and on my list to get back to. Such is the life of a busy indie author!
If you are writing children’s books, or considering doing so, I hope you’ll find these tips of use. They are just the tip of the iceberg, by the way – space is limited.
As for all authors this is a long-term game. There’s just more physical effort and thinking outside the box when it comes to selling children’s books.
- Make Your Website Easy to Navigate
- Plan For Early Sales To Be Offline
- Contact Local Press and Community Websites
- Children’s Book Bloggers & Individual Reviewers
- Children’s Book Review Websites & Giveaways
- Experiment with Amazon Ads

## The article starts below, but first: FREE STUFF!
- Make A Plan For Email Marketing
Make Your Website Easy to Navigate
Plan For Early Sales To Be Offline
Contact Local Press and Community Websites
Children’s Book Bloggers & Individual Reviewers
Children’s Book Review Websites & Giveaways
Experiment with Amazon Ads
Make A Plan For Email Marketing

## 1. Make Your Website Easy to Navigate
This will be your ‘calling card’ when you introduce yourself locally and farther afield. Make it easy for busy parents, book buyers and teachers to see the age range(s) for your books and what else you can offer.
Content to include (but not limited to):
- About you…
- An appealing info page for each book, with visual variety and buy links
- Links to any activity sheets, crosswords, word searches, teaching plans etc
- An email sign-up that’s clearly aimed at parents. As with adult book marketing, offer an incentive such as a short story, free chapters, character diary or other unique freebie.
- A school visits page (more on school visits below)
- Where to buy your books
- Blog page (optional)
See kareninglisauthor.com as an example. NB: this puts usability over aesthetics for busy teachers and parents. I doubt they mind. I will upgrade the look and feel when eventually I get time!

## 2. Plan For Early Sales To Be Offline
Don’t see this as a chore. Meeting your readers is one of the most rewarding things about being a children’s author! And it’s the start of the process that will gradually get you known through word of mouth – one of the key ways that children’s books get discovered and recommended by parents, children, librarians and teachers.
It’s also extremely helpful for getting early reviews, which you will need these once you get to online marketing. Pop a flyer or bookmark that asks for reviews inside each book that you sell. For those who don’t buy, offer the same signed flyer/bookmark on the day.

- Your local library. Offer to run a free event then help promote it by providing flyers at the desk, on noticeboards in local coffee shops frequented by parents, via your local community magazine, press and local schools. Use Canva and your original artwork for the flyers.
- Your local bookshop. Ask to host a signing and reading, if they have room. Provide ‘shelf talkers’ for your book, again made using Canva, and say you will promote the event locally.
- Local schools. Check online or call to get the name of the literacy coordinator or teacher for the children in your target age group. Tailor and send an email that includes: (i) a book(s) overview sheet with book jackets, sample interior illustrations, plot synopsis and early review quotes (ii) a summary of how you will run your sessions.
- Local playgroups or parenting groups if you have a picture book. Run a free session and take along books to sign and sell. Or, offer to host your own coffee morning and story time.
- Any local educational visitor centres / children’s farms / other venues that attract families with young children and have a connection with your book’s theme. They may be open to stocking your book in their shop and/or letting you run an event.
Use Canva and your original artwork for the flyers

## 3. Contact Local Press and Community Websites
Provide press releases or short articles about new books launches, event appearances, key milestones/significant achievements or anything else that is genuinely newsworthy.
Emphasize any local inspiration or setting for the story, the fact that you are local, where parents can buy your book locally (ideally signed), your availability for local school visits etc. Include local setting /event photos where relevant.
Include a book cover, headshot, short bio along with the press release.

## 4. Children’s Book Bloggers & Individual Reviewers
See who’s posted reviews about children’s books that are similar to yours on Amazon, Goodreads or other sites. Can you track down their contact details? If they’ve made these public, drop them a line and ask if they or their children might like to review your book.
Search Facebook groups, local community sites and Google for children’s book groups – usually adults who enjoy reading or discussing children’s books. Make contact with those that fit your niche to see if anyone would like a review copy. (Don’t pay for any review or for an expedited review.)

## 5. Children’s Book Review Websites & Giveaways
The sites below offer free as well as paid options and are genuine. You won’t sell more books in the short-term but you will have a permanent place to point to reviews as part of a long-term marketing strategy. Only pay if you have budget to spare.
- Toppsta (UK)
- The Children’s Book Review (USA)

## 6. Experiment with Amazon Ads
It’s best to do this once you have a number of good reviews.
- Search online (including this website) for tips on how to niche down and laser target for best results; thankfully the principles are the same for children’s books as for all other books.
- Start low, check and adjust regularly and never commit to more than you can afford to lose.
- Advertise both ebooks and print books – most Kindle book ads translate into print sales – and sometimes parents will buy for Kindle if it’s cheap, to ‘test read’ for suitability for a child before buying in print.

## 7.  Make A Plan For Email Marketing
This, in my experience, is the most problematic aspect of children’s book marketing and something I’ve yet to nail or test properly. Parents are extremely busy and I’m conscious of not wanting to add to their ‘to-do list’ unless I have something of genuine interest to share.
Moreover, as children grow older their tastes and needs change, making my mailing list a moving target.
For what it’s worth, my ‘dream’ regular email marketing plan is likely to include:
- Info on great books their children might enjoy. (I read a lot of children’s books to keep up with the wider market.)
- News about upcoming children’s literature events/festivals.
- Children’s writing competitions.
- What I’m currently working on – perhaps asking for feedback or input from their children.
- Ideas for new stories I may have come across recently.
- New book launches (in my case these come no more than once a year!)
- Insights into children’s reading habits/how to encourage reluctant readers etc.
- Occasional offers on my books.
- A reminder about how parents can buy signed copies of my books.
- Reports from school visits and how they can request one.
I’d say that once a month is sufficient for sending emails.
As I mentioned earlier, there are many more way to reach your readers, both online and face-to-face; hopefully the seven above will set you in the right direction.
I cover all of the above and much more in How To Self-Publish and Market A Children’s Book – a practical and in-depth guide based on my seven years of children’s self-publishing. Inside the book, there are links to download order forms and flyers to use when contacting schools.
Back on long-tail marketing, you can read about the seven-year journey of The Secret Lake to Amazon UK bestseller on my blog. I hope you enjoy the ride!

I’m so grateful to Karen for coming along today and sharing some of her hard-won wisdom on how to crack the ever-tricky children’s market. She has sold over 20,000 books now and I think she’s about to sell a lot more too as the overwhelming majority of those sales have come in the last year.
Right now, for example, she has a print book ranked at #926 on Amazon UK – after it was camped in the Top 500 for some time – one that was published way back in 2011 and has found a new life more recently, and I urge you to read the story behind that on Karen’s blog.
Most of all though, I strongly recommend that you purchase How To Self-Publish and Market A Children’s Book if you are writing children’s books it has great information for new and experienced authors alike.
Children’s authors have been crying out for a resource like this. Please share this post, those book links, and Karen’s helpful site with any you may know.

If you enjoyed this you might also want to read my monster post on How To Self Publish A Book.

--------------------------

Kindle Unlimited – A Cheater Magnet
Posted by David Gaughran 29 January 2021. Amazon, Bewares • 83 Comments.

I don’t hate Kindle Unlimited; I hate scammers who care more about hacks than books, and don’t care how many authors they cheat out of royalties.
While all my own books are currently wide, I have also work on huge marketing campaigns for others which regularly attained over 10m Kindle Unlimited page reads per month. I’m not saying that to brag — the respective authors are doing the hardest part of the equation by writing books which resonate so widely — I merely state this to show that I understand how to (ethically) work Kindle Unlimited, and that I have nothing against it per se.
Such caveats are necessary as Kindle Unlimited elicits strong feelings — and it’s not just down to self-interest. Some authors object to exclusivity on principle and refuse to enroll. Others are concerned with the compensation model or the market as a whole.
These are concerns I shared seven years ago when KDP Select was first launched in December 2011:
By accepting the compensation system Amazon is proposing, we are agreeing to fight for a limited pot of cash – no matter how many authors are scrambling for it. Amazon say they will raise it if the scheme is popular, but it’s all at their discretion. We have no say. They have all the power under this new model.
Under Amazon’s scheme, we never know what we will be paid until well after the fact. We’re not even being made a crummy offer. There’s no minimum guaranteed payment per rental. We know what the size of the pot is (for one month of the three month exclusivity they demand), but have no idea how many rentals it will cover. We’re being told afterwards what we did (or didn’t) get paid.
Despite these concerns, it must be stated that Kindle Unlimited has been very positive for many authors. It has made careers for some hard-working, honest writers. While no one likes granting Amazon exclusivity, lots of people clearly view it pragmatically and enroll their books in the program if they feel that being exclusive earns them more money overall.
It’s hard to argue with that sentiment; everyone needs to put food on the table. Although it must also be said that many authors feel they must enroll to get any kind of visibility in the Kindle Store, or their primary source of income collapses — a problem exacerbated by Amazon’s tendency to strongly prefer exclusive books for any merchandizing opportunities like Kindle Daily Deals.
The biggest problem for the market overall — more than individual concerns, forced exclusivity, and a skewed compensation model — has been the exponential rise in scamming, compounded by the catch-and-release approach Amazon has historically taken to those gaming the system.

### Bad Boy Book Stuffers & Kindle Hacks
We aren’t talking minor infractions here. A hardcore group of internet marketers invaded the Kindle Store and constructed an elaborate system for purloining millions of dollars from the Kindle Unlimited pot — from our end, in other words. Various seamy behaviors were engaged in from a menu containing rank manipulation, incentivizing purchases, mass gifting, clickfarms, fake reviews, formatting hacks, plagiarism, and book stuffing, but the actual approach varied on a case-by-case basis.
These were all serious breaches in isolation, but when deployed together they acted like a turbo-charged smash-and-grab on the author pot. One that Amazon turned a blind eye to again and again.
Amazon eventually took action in June 2018, after a concerted PR campaign by a bunch of writers on social media and via the press — a step taken in desperation after Amazon refused to listen to endless reports exhaustively documenting these abuses.
Amazon had instituted a bunch of automated system to detect fraud in the latter part of 2017, but these seemed to catch more innocent authors than cheaters. And when direct sanctions were finally applied in June 2018, they were far from comprehensive.

### Amazon Takes (Some) Action
Chance Carter was nuked from the Kindle Store after one particularly ill-advised competition aimed at manipulating reviews led to his entire shady business model being exposed on social media. Tia Siren was next, after she was shown to be using, amongst other things, a series of tricks to artificially inflate her page count. Cassandra Dee was also taken down after her mosaic book stuffing was detailed.
It was no accident that these “authors” — I use that term very loosely here — were all part of the same shady mastermind circle, or that others banned from Amazon around this time were part of the same crew.
Media articles like this excellent piece from Kayleigh Donaldson in Pajiba and this in-depth article from Sarah Jeong in The Verge kept the pressure on Amazon. While this blog has been the more visible face of the campaign, at times, it should be clearly stated that huge numbers of authors have been working in the background on this: collating information, sending reports to Amazon, talking to journalists, exerting pressure on social media, expressing their concerns to contacts and reps at KDP.
It was a widespread, collective effort — which didn’t stop just because Amazon put one head on a pike.
A second wave of purges ensued in July and, when the dust settled, perhaps half of Chance Carter’s mastermind circle had been ousted from the Kindle Store: not just Tia Siren and Cassandra Dee, but others like Rye Hart, Nikki Chase, Juliana Conners, Alexis Angel, and Kira Blakely — the latter infamous for being a married man who was secretly pretending to be female on social media to elicit private sexual information from young women. This is the kind of person we are dealing with here.
While these purges were extremely welcome, they were far from complete. Many questionable figures were left completely intact — despite Amazon being in possession of clear evidence as to their behavior for over nine months. Millions of dollars from our compensation fund were paid out to these people in that period, let us not forget.

### Cleaner Charts… For A While
For a month or two, though, things improved. The charts cleaned up. Real, actual authors — not faceless book stuffers powered by ghostwriters — started surfacing again. Readers were saying that it was easier to find good books in the charts. I noticed the difference myself in July when helping someone with a launch; it seemed to take less of a push to get in the Top 100. I stopped paying attention to what the scammers were doing. Life was good.
It seems like Amazon stopped paying attention too. It was far harder to get into the Top 100 in September, and a quick look at the charts showed why. Many of those “authors” from Chance Carter’s mastermind circle who inexplicably survived the purges of June/July — grotesque characters like RR Banks — were suddenly charting again. En masse. With multiple books each, simultaneously.
They had figured out a new hole in the fence. I looked at the Contemporary Romance charts for the first time in a while and all the real authors were being pushed down again, while all the ghostwritten trash was swamping the Kindle Store once more.
This is the usual pattern with Amazon and scammers: they find a hole in the fence, we scream like crazy pointing it out, Amazon takes forever to click into gear — usually only after negative PR — fails to deal with the problem comprehensively, and then the scammers get smarter. Harder to detect. Better at grabbing more cash before the next fence-hole is patched. The cycle has been continuing for four years.
I was just about to write off the action in June/July as merely an isolated attempt to counter the negative publicity, when I got some news last night that more authors had been taken down — again from that same infamous circle: Nicole Elliot, Alice Ward, and Amy Brent.

### Bad Boys Return to Kindle Unlimited
Many more remain, however. And what’s worse is this: I’ve heard reports that many of those who were banned in June and July have either already returned under new pen names or are gearing up to do so: forming companies, hiring ghostwriters, commissioning covers. That they are all doing so simultaneously is no surprise. It’s clear they have find a new way to game the system and are all going to attack the fence at the same time, with as much content as possible.
While Amazon had been successful at stopping a handful of these guys from returning under new names over the summer, it is clear now that it has missed many more. But Amazon is in possession of all that information now, so we’ll see what action it takes.
Aside from permanently decommissioning these guys, however, a deeper conversation needs to be had about why these internet marketers are choosing the Kindle Store as their playground when they could be hawking diet pills or flipping real estate. Because these guys aren’t writers. They aren’t even readers!

I will always be grateful to Amazon for so many things. Democratizing publishing. Opening up distribution. Giving us access to readers in unprecedented ways. Thinking deeply about the problems of visibility and discoverability, and building a recommendation engine which was (largely) agnostic, one which allowed any book, by any author or publisher, at any price, to be the one recommended.
Amazon didn’t just popularize ebooks, it revolutionized the ways that books get recommended to readers, which created a massive opportunity for authors — and we then capitalized on to an unbelievable extent. Self-publishers have taken over around half the US ebook market in less than ten years, which is just crazy. And that was largely made possible by Amazon.
That said, it hasn’t all been positive, and the trend in the last few years is very choppy. The introduction of Kindle Unlimited has been a big win for some writers and a huge loss for others. Any disruptive innovation will shake up the population of winners and losers — that’s what disruption does.
However, this particular innovation seems to have worsened the power curve considerably. While those winners are getting unprecedented riches, everyone else seems to be either writing faster and advertising more to stay still, or is slipping back.
I don’t think that’s healthy for the market overall or sustainable in the long-term — and it’s encouraging practices which worsen all those trends, such as the use of ghostwriters to power an incredible release schedule.
The amount of grifters and cheaters and fraudsters which have flooded Amazon since the introduction of Kindle Unlimited is remarkable. You will always get scamming anywhere that money and the internet intersect, and Amazon has always had some level of it, but it exploded exponentially since the introduction of Kindle Unlimited — particularly the per-page, communal pot compensation system brought in during its second year.
Amazon’s response has always been to take a very light touch approach to regulating the Kindle Store. It lets bad actors get away with an incredible amount before it makes a move.
It would be welcome if this philosophy was inspired by a desire to be absolutely sure of someone’s guilt before taking action, but it appears to be instead led by a desire to have automated systems — rather than expensive human beings — doing all the heavy lifting. Systems which have led to innocent authors getting rank-stripped and losing page reads.
Meanwhile, the big scammy whales don’t get spotted by these systems, it seems. Amazon will then ignore dozens of reports from all sorts of sources about someone who is clearly scamming the system before it eventually (sometimes) takes action — usually in response to a PR black eye. And this leaves authors in a difficult position because Amazon doesn’t listen to us: either we go to the press or the scamming gets worse.
That’s not a healthy situation for anyone involved.
I’ve never understood Amazon’s approach to this mess. Amazon spent so much time and money creating the best recommendation engine on the planet, which has led to it being repeatedly named as the #1 most trusted brand in the world by consumers. The quality of recommendations that customers get surely plays a huge part in that — and Amazon has consistently taken the long-term approach of foregoing easy money to build trust in those recommendations.
Letting scammers piss all over the charts hugely undercuts that.
I wonder if Amazon ever thinks about this. Does it ever wonder why these cheaters have chosen the Kindle Store as their playground? Does Amazon ever ask itself this: what it is specifically about Kindle Unlimited that makes the publishing business suddenly attractive to these jackals?
It’s time to have that conversation.

--------------------------

Click Here For Success | Lith King Logic
Posted by David Gaughran 29 January 2021. Bewares, Marketing • 28 Comments.

## The article starts below, but first: FREE STUFF!
Hi, my name is Bob, and I bring wonderful news: you can now simply click here for success. You may know me from various scourges that have plagued the earth since the advent of broadband.
I was once like you: tired, overworked, chasing success 24/7 but never seeming to get any closer to it – no matter what I tried. But since I became Dark Lord Kieckhefer of the Fourth Order of Necromancers, I haven’t looked back.
And now I want to help you too.
I know why you’re here. You crave success but you want to skip the boring part where you actually do stuff. You’ve tried having a virtual assistant, but they need too much oversight and instruction. If only there was a way of cloning yourself, you have often joked.
That day is here.
Think And Grow Lich is the only automated system on the market today for those who want to create their own course about how to sell your course on how to market a course. This blog post is a one-time only SPECIAL OFFER: for 100% off the regular price of $5,000 you can get all the secrets without making those twelve easy payments!
Have you been slaving away without much reward? Are you sick of putting in all the time and effort to learn something when you could have just skipped that step? You need Think And Grow Lich.
Using our patented SkullMasque technology, we can map your flexible ethics and ruthless approach directly onto the neural patterns of your own newly raised undead army, who will then spam customers on your behalf so you can relax on the beach and write disingenuous articles about how you made your money!
Soon you too will be publishing books which are little more than glorified lead-generation exercises, funneling thousands of unsuspecting writers into endless squeeze pages, like some kind of giant ClickFunnel-filled Esophagus of Doom.
Here’s the best part: you don’t even need to be a necromancer. Why bother spending a decade or more learning how to communicate with the deceased and reanimate their corpses when you can hire a ghost to do it for you?
Warning: may contain traces of regret.

--------------------------

How To Advertise And Sell More Books
Posted by David Gaughran 5 April 2021. Marketing, Resources • 31 Comments.

I have a wonderful guest post today from author Nicholas Erik – a skilled marketer with a keen analytical mind, who will show you how to analyze the profitability of your paid ads, so you can sell more books. It’s easily the longest post we’ve had here – over 4,000 words – but it’s worth settling in for this excellent, comprehensive guide which will have something useful for all self-publishers, from beginners to experts. Here’s Nick with more:
***
As the title might suggest, this guide is all about how to analyze the profitability of your paid ads to help you sell more books. The step-by-step system outlined within is effective for both promo sites and pay-per-click (PPC) platforms such as Facebook Ads, Amazon Advertising, and BookBub.
If you follow the steps in this guide, you’ll have solid numbers on which to base your advertising decisions—instead of making guesses regarding their profitability.
I want to be clear: paid advertising—particularly PPC—has a steep learning curve. Developing your own skills demands extensive testing and practice. It is likely, in the beginning, that your ads will be unprofitable.
If your budget is limited, do not spend money you don’t have. Start small, and continually reinvest a portion (or all) of the profits back into your publishing business. Those with no budget can still apply many of the concepts to increase the effectiveness of their free marketing efforts.
Since losing money is possible, many authors are hesitant to advertise and view it as risky. Done correctly, however, paid advertising is not risky and is instead a reliable profit generator.
In fact, increased competition (over 7 million books and counting on the Kindle Store) and vastly decreased organic visibility make it difficult—though not impossible—for authors to be successful in 2018 without spending money on ads.
Successfully analyzing your ads involves calculating three simple metrics: cost per download, sellthrough, and revenue per download. But before we begin with the math, it’s important to lay out seven principles critical for profitable advertising.

There is a lot of information here, but if you take it slow I hope you’ll find the concepts intuitive.
Reading this guide in its entirety prior to doing your own analysis will be beneficial. After you’ve read it once, go back through and do the calculations step-by-step. That way, you’ll have a full understanding of how each component dovetails as you crunch your own numbers.
Remember that these numbers are unique to each series—which means you need to calculate them for each series you plan on advertising.
Now on to those principles.

Following these seven principles is critical to running profitable advertising, and can save you substantial time and money. As with all rules, there are exceptions, but if you’re starting off, you should break them only after careful consideration.
PRINCIPLE 1: Most, if not all, of your profit will come from sellthrough. This means the longer your series, the more money you can generally spend advertising it. Advertising a standalone novel is difficult (and rarely profitable outside of a BookBub Featured Deal), and not recommended unless you’re a highly skilled marketer.
PRINCIPLE 2: Focus your advertising on Book 1. Even in a series of standalone novels, many new readers will start with Book 1. Advertising later books typically produces smaller returns. Only advertise later books if you get a BookBub Featured Deal, or if you’ve exhausted all options for Book 1.
You can also advertise a series starter box set—e.g. Books 1, 2 & 3. The general principle here is that it’s easier to sell new readers on the beginning of the series (otherwise known as your funnel starter).
Advertising only Book 1 has the added benefit of making the administrative side far more manageable. Tracking ads for five or ten titles in a series is a nightmare.
As a final note, you should also advertise your latest release in a series—especially during the launch— but it’s much harder to analyze the data in the manner outlined below. There are too many variables skewing the launch numbers to make such analysis useful.
Instead, the general purpose of advertising the latest book is visibility and general awareness: making sure your fans are aware that it’s out, while also drawing some new eyeballs to the series.
PRINCIPLE 3: When using promotional sites, stick with proven options. You can find my curated, regularly updated list of recommended sites here.
PRINCIPLE 4: When running PPC ads, start small ($5 – $10/day). Make sure your ads are profitable before attempting to scale. If your ads are unprofitable at a small spend, a larger budget only increases your losses.
PRINCIPLE 5: While extremely useful, these metrics—cost per download, sellthrough, revenue per download, conversion et al—are estimates. Due to the nature of Amazon’s reporting and plain old variance, it’s impossible to predict with absolute certainty that your sellthrough will be precisely 41.4% over the next three weeks, that your book will convert at 32.5% on Tuesday, or a certain promo site produced exactly 921 downloads.
With that in mind, always factor in a margin of safety when advertising.
PRINCIPLE 6: Advertising most books will not be profitable (outside of BookBub Featured Deals). This is not a reflection on the book’s quality. Many books simply don’t hit the right commercial notes to resonate with a larger audience.
If you find, after running the numbers, that you’ve written such a book or series, don’t worry—but don’t force the issue by advertising anyway. This is how you rack up huge losses.
There are free marketing alternatives for these titles: mentioning them in your newsletter and autoresponder, entering cross promotions, social media, your website, and so forth.
PRINCIPLE 7: Profitable advertising requires consistent testing. You can—and should—use advertising principles, tactics, and ideas that have proven profitable for other authors. But ultimately, you must develop your own ads and ideas by finding what works for your books.
This is the number one rule of advertising. If you forget everything else, be sure to test.
One key note on testing: when adjusting your book’s back matter, blurb, cover, price, or other elements that affect the numbers, only change one major element at a time. If something impacts your numbers, you want to know exactly what was responsible.
That wraps up our key principles. Time to dive into cost per download.

Everybody has a price, as the old saying goes.
Advertisers have prices, too. But the sticker price—whether it’s $20 or $400—isn’t an accurate gauge of the true cost. BookBub is sometimes mistakenly referred to as the most expensive advertiser in the game. At first glance, this rings true—but digging into the numbers reveals a different story.
That’s because determining an advertiser’s true effectiveness requires calculating the cost per download (or sale).
The equation for cost per download is:
The cost of advertising is the price of the promotion.
The # of downloads is the number of downloads or sales the promotion produced.
The baseline is the average number of downloads or sales your book gets without promotion.
To calculate the baseline, you can either:
1. Take the average # of downloads over a recent 7-day span with no promotion.
2. Look at the # of downloads a few days prior to the promotion and eyeball it.
Note that the baseline varies. Closer to release, or a couple months after a big promotion, your baseline might be 70 downloads/day. For an older backlist title, it might be 5 downloads—or even zero.
Let’s analyze some real numbers. Throughout this guide, I’ll be using my urban fantasy book Lightning Blade as a case study. Lightning Blade was a permafree title. However, it’s critical to understand that you can use the exact same calculations for paid titles without any changes.
Since I primarily advertise on Amazon, I’ve included Amazon downloads only. For the sake of the cleanest comparison, I do not include “tail” downloads from the days after the promotion. Depending on your situation, you might include downloads from other retailers—Barnes & Noble, iBooks, Kobo, Google Play et al.—or the tail.
Whatever you decide, make sure your calculations are consistent. Numbers that include all retailers and the tail are not directly comparable to those which only include a single retailer on a single day.
- Cost of advertising: The BookBub promotion cost $219.
- # of downloads: 19,266 Amazon downloads.
- Baseline downloads: about 300/day.
Thus, the cost per download was $219 / (19266 – 300) = 1.2¢ or $0.012.
By comparison, an EReaderIQ promotion produced a cost per download of $15 / (123 – 23) = 15¢ ($0.15).
Cost per download doesn’t just work for promo sites; in fact, it’s more critical when using PPC, where you can spend money like water.
The Facebook Ads produced a cost per download of $5.08 / (22 – 5) = 29.9¢ ($0.299).
Out of these three advertisers, BookBub was the cheapest, and Facebook was the most expensive. Knowing the true cost is critical when allocating your hard-earned advertising dollars. At the end of this guide, you’ll find a cost per download comparison chart of over twenty promotional sites.
Cost per download has far more utility than just determining the actual cost of advertising options, however. In conjunction with sellthrough and revenue per download, you can use cost per download to determine whether a specific advertiser will be profitable for your series—before booking a single promotion.
Before we go deeper into the math, however, let’s take a quick moment to address a question you might have: can I decrease my cost per download?
Yes—and I’ll show you how.

Let’s say you’re getting 75 downloads for $10 (making your cost per download 13.3¢).
Not bad. Maybe you’re even profitable if your series has strong sellthrough. But you’d obviously prefer to get 100 downloads for the same price (10¢ a download).
This may or may not be possible when advertising on promotional sites. The biggest influences on the number of downloads you receive from these sites are the quality and size of their lists.
When you’re running PPC ads, however, conversion optimization has a huge influence on your cost per download.
Conversion rate is calculated as follows:
The # of downloads is the number of downloads or sales your book received.
The # of ad clicks is the number of people who clicked on your PPC ads. This tells you the number of visitors your Amazon page received.
To calculate (and optimize) conversion, you’ll need to run PPC ads like those offered by Facebook, Amazon, or BookBub. Otherwise, there’s no way to estimate how many people visited your Amazon page, since promo sites don’t provide this data.
The more downloads and clicks you get, the more confident you can be that your data is accurate. But this can take a long time and be very expensive.
My rule of thumb is to take a period of time with at least 1000 ad clicks and 300 downloads on a free book. On a paid book, the # of sales you’ll be dealing with is much smaller. It’s usually expensive to get 300 sales, so I’d aim for 30 – 100 sales.
These are Lightning Blade’s numbers from 6/24 – 7/15:
- # of downloads: 463
- # of Facebook Ad clicks (e.g. visitors): 1779
- Conversion rate: 463/1779 = 26%
Once you have your conversion rate, you can run tests to improve it. The following three elements have the largest impact on conversion (in order from biggest to smallest):
1. Price. Lower prices produce higher conversion; free books have about a 10x higher conversion rate than paid.
2. Cover
3. Blurb
Of these, you’ll mostly experiment with the price and blurb, since those are quick (and free) to change. By continually running tests, you can iterate toward a better Amazon page. Only change one thing at a time, so you know what was responsible for any changes in conversion rate.
An important side note: the audience to which you target your ads makes a big difference in conversion. For example, if I advertise my urban fantasy book to readers interested in thrillers, my conversion will be atrocious.
Make sure you’re only targeting audiences who will be interested in your book.
Now that you know how to increase your book’s conversion rate (and thereby decrease your cost per download), we can move on to the next piece of the analysis puzzle: sellthrough.

Sellthrough—also known as readthrough—is the lifeblood of every author’s career. Simply put, we need readers to read more than one of our books. Even if you never plan to spend a dollar on advertising, knowing your sellthrough is vital.
Sellthrough is the percentage of readers who, upon finishing a book, purchase the next book. Let’s say ten people bought Book 1, and five go on to purchase Book 2.
The sellthrough would be 50%—solid, but not earthshattering. Low sellthrough, however, is a glaring problem that you need to address ASAP.
Low sellthrough is generally a result of three things:
1. Your book is free. Free books have significantly lower sellthrough (2%+) than paid ones (40%+). This is not a problem unless your sellthrough is low for a free book.
2. Poorly optimized back matter. This can be fixed.
3. People aren’t finishing the book, or didn’t find it compelling enough to pick up the sequel. This cannot be reliably fixed on that series.
Problem three often hints at deeper craft-related problems—or it could be that a particular series simply didn’t resonate with readers. If your sellthrough is consistently poor across multiple series, however, there are craft issues that must be addressed.
It’s important to understand that while sellthrough is fixable on a career level—you can learn techniques like cliffhangers, effective pacing, scene and sequel structure, plot structure and so forth to keep readers turning the pages—on a book/series level it usually is not.
I mention this because, in the face of poor sellthrough, the natural inclination is to rewrite or otherwise overhaul Book 1. This is not recommended. It’s a huge investment of capital, and rarely fixes whatever problems prevented readers from finishing the title.
Your best option for a series with low sellthrough is to conclude it and start a new series.
With those points out of the way, here’s the equation for sellthrough:
Let’s analyze some real numbers again from Lightning Blade:
- # of downloads of Book 1: 1405
- # of sales of Book 2: 20
- # of sales of Book 3: 11
- # of sales of the complete trilogy box set: 28
In this case, since the reader can either purchase Book 2 or the complete trilogy after reading Book 1, we need to add these sellthrough numbers together to get the total sellthrough.
1.42% + 1.99% = 3.41% sellthrough
This means, of the 1405 readers who downloaded Lightning Blade, 3.41% of them purchase the next book. That’s solid.
In a few minutes, we’ll use that sellthrough number to calculate revenue per download. But first, I’ll show you how to optimize your back matter to increase your sellthrough.

### Optimizing Your Back Matter
While revising a book to increase its sellthrough is a dicey proposition that I do not recommend, optimizing the back matter is a quick, effective way to bump flagging sellthrough.
Most back matter is ineffective because it offers too many choices. Authors tend to overwhelm readers by throwing every link and request imaginable into the back matter.
This causes two problems:
1. Each choice is not equal in value. A Twitter or Instagram follow—or even an Amazon review—has far less value than a sale.
2. Having too many choices makes many people default to the easiest choice of all: closing the book without taking any action.
Thus, we want to streamline our back matter to focus on the essentials.
This is why I went from back matter containing three CTAs (calls to action)—a review request, mailing list link, and link to the next book (with a short blurb)—to a single CTA.
A link to the next book (with a short blurb).
The old, three CTA version is on the left. The new, one CTA version is on the right.
The new one was 1.4x more effective—producing 4.8% sellthrough (versus 3.4%).
This adjustment takes five minutes: just delete extraneous links and text. However, you’ve likely heard that reviews and mailing list subscribers are precious, and might be hesitant to remove such requests.
A review request has little value now that an automated Amazon pop-up at the end of each book asks readers to review it.
A subscriber has significant value, but a sale is often worth more. After a reader completes the mailing list sign up process some ten minutes later their interest in purchasing Book 2 might have already waned—or they might simply get distracted by other things.
I’d rather capture the sale right away.
I have a mailing list link in the front matter, for those readers who are interested in joining. I also include the mailing list link in the back matter of the final book in the series—if a reader makes it through an entire series, they’re likely to be a fan of my work and interested in hearing more from me.
You can use a two CTA version instead—a link to the next book (with a short blurb) and a link to the mailing list—if you’d like.
Finally, you can place any additional links (e.g. review requests, social media et al.) that don’t make the cut in the About the Author section.
Two best practices that are visible if you really squint at the image above:
1. Put your CTAs right after THE END, on the same page. If you have a page break, an automatic Amazon pop-up selling other authors’ books and asking the reader to review triggers, essentially overriding your back matter.
2. Always include direct links. This can be a pain if you’re wide, but including a direct link to the retailer (or your mailing list/the review form, if you include those links) helps.
Now that we’ve optimized our back matter, we can move on to our final bit of number crunching: calculating revenue per download.

### Revenue Per Download
Remember that sellthrough number we came up with a few minutes ago? Good. We’ll need it to calculate revenue per download. This number tells you what each download of the advertised book (usually Book 1 or the series starter box set) is worth.
Here’s how you calculate revenue per download:
The ellipses indicate that if you have more books in the series, you need to add them to the calculation.
Here’s how this looks with real numbers—I’ve calculated the revenue per download at both 3.4% and 4.8% sellthrough so you can clearly see the impact.
- Book 1 net royalty: $0.00 (since it’s free)
- Book 2 net royalty: $4.99 * 0.70 = $3.49
- Book 3 net royalty: $4.99 * 0.70 = $3.49
- Box set net royalty: $9.99 x 0.70 = $6.99
Old sellthrough:
- Book 1 > 2 sellthrough: 1.42%
- Book 1 > 3 sellthrough: 0.78%
- Book 1 > Box sellthrough: 1.99%
New sellthrough:
- Book 1 > 2 sellthrough: 2.54%
- Book 1 > 3 sellthrough: 2.15%
- Book 1 > Box sellthrough: 2.3%
At 3.4% sellthrough, each Book 1 download produces 7.7¢ in revenue if a reader buys Book 2, or 13.9¢ in revenue if they buy the box set. This averages out to 10.8¢ in revenue per download.
At 4.8% sellthrough, these jump to 16.4¢ and 16.1¢, respectively, for an average of 16.2¢.

### One More Step If You Have A Box Set
While averaging the revenue per download numbers from the box set and Book 2 together yields a solid estimate, it’s not 100% accurate. This is because not everyone who buys Book 2 goes on to buy Book 3, which means this path through the funnel doesn’t produce the same revenue as when they buy the box set.
Calculating the accurate revenue per download number requires a weighted average.
Here, 41.6% of people purchased Book 2 (20 sales/48 sales of Book 2 + Box), and 59.4% of people bought the box.
Thus, to calculate the actual revenue per download you would do the following:
(0.416 * 0.077) + (0.594 * 0.139) = $0.115, or 11.5¢ per download.
The numbers don’t change much with the new sellthrough, since the # of units sold are closer to 50-50 (32 of Book 2, 29 of the box):
(0.524 * 0.164) + (0.476 * 0.161) = $0.162 or 16.2¢ cents per download
You can skip this step if you don’t have a box set.
Or just average the numbers together for the sake of simplicity.
That does it for the data analysis portion of the guide. Now that we have our numbers, we can determine what sites and platforms will be profitable for our books.

### How To Analyze Profitability (Final Step)
Determining whether an advertiser will be profitable for a certain book is easy.
1. Take that advertiser’s cost per download.
2. Then compare it to your book’s revenue per download.
3. If the cost is higher than the revenue, then that advertiser will be unprofitable.
For Lightning Blade, each download is worth 11.5 – 16.2¢ (depending on sellthrough). This makes any site costing more than 11.5 cents per download risky; recall from the introduction that these numbers, while incredibly useful, are just estimates. I have a lot of historical data suggesting I can expect 3 – 3.5% sellthrough on Lightning Blade. While I believe the improved back matter increased my sellthrough, I don’t know whether it’s actually 4.8%, or something smaller, like 4% or 4.5%.
I do know, however, that any advertiser costing more than 16.2¢ per download will be unprofitable.
Of course, calculating the cost per download for each individual site is a pain—not to mention expensive. It’s nice to just know what works, minus the trial and error.
So I did it for you.
Below, you’ll find 20+ promotional sites sorted by cost per download. Cost per download of course varies based on genre and your book’s conversion rate, but this should provide a solid starting point for your own endeavors.
These ran during the Summer/Fall of 2018 (so over the past four months) on Lightning Blade. The book had run on many of the sites before. If it was the first run, I made a note. I booked each site’s fantasy list (or the equivalent).
I’ve included numbers for a few other genres/promo stacks for the sake of comparison, as well as Lightning Blade’s 2017 BookBub run and a Freebooksy on one of my other urban fantasy books.
PPC platforms like Facebook, BookBub, and Amazon Advertising are not included, because cost-per-click (CPC)—and thus, the cost per download—is heavily influenced by your genre and the quality of your ads. When running PPC ads, you’ll need to use your own data to analyze your ads’ profitability.

Since we’ve covered a lot of ground—and this whole calculation business might seem overly complex—here’s the complete process, which also serves as a little to do checklist:
1. Calculate the cost per download.
2. Calculate the sellthrough for each series.
3. Use the sellthrough to calculate the revenue per download.
4. Compare the revenue per download to the cost per download. If the cost is higher, that advertiser will not be profitable for that series.
Run the numbers for a few series—I promise it’ll be an eye-opening exercise.
Other things to do:
1. Focus your advertising on Book 1 (or a series starter box set of Books 1, 2 & 3).
2. Test various blurbs, prices, and covers to increase your conversion rate (and thus lower your cost per download).
3. Optimize your back matter to increase your sellthrough. Limit your CTAs—a link to Book 2 with a short teaser and maybe a link to your newsletter. Good sellthrough is the key to profitable advertising, and, in general, a successful career.
Remember to make just one major change at a time, so you can measure the effects.
If you’re having problems with sellthrough, but your back matter is optimized, read through the reviews and try to uncover why readers aren’t buying the next book. Don’t revise that book; wrap up the series, then start a completely new series that addresses the previous craft problems.
And finally, don’t force the issue. Many books can’t be profitably advertised (outside of BookBub Featured Deals). When this is the case, don’t spend money advertising them.
Instead, market these titles through free, passive means: your email newsletter and its autoresponder, social media, your website and so forth. This won’t generate explosive results, but it can produce a steady income, particularly with a large backlist.
You can find a curated, up-to-date list of promo sites (and their respective cost per download) on my site here.
That’s it. Go sell some books.

Numbers vary based on genre; romance, in particular, has its own set of marketing rules.
Remember: your own data is king. Nonetheless, if your numbers are well below the “solid” benchmarks below, you have a problem that needs to be addressed.
- Conversion (free book): 25%+ is solid; maxes out at 50 – 60%
- Conversion (paid book): 2 – 5%+ is solid; maxes out at 10 – 12%
- Sellthrough (from a free book to Book 2): 2%+ is solid; maxes out at 10% – 15%
- Sellthrough (from a paid book to Book 2): 50%+ is solid; maxes out at 80 – 90%
- Sellthrough (from a KU book to Book 2—note that I’m referring to readers borrowing Book 2, not buying it): 75%+ is solid; maxes out at 85 – 90%
Also note that sellthrough on later volumes in a series that must be read in order can approach 100%, unless you do something egregious like kill a main character.
***
Nicholas Erik is the author of 24 SF/F novels. He also runs marketing campaigns for indie authors in the mystery, adventure, and thriller genres. Check out his free Ultimate Guide to Book Marketing at nicholaserik.com/start.
***
A huge thank you from me to Nick for this wonderful resource – I’m sure a lot of work went into it and lots and lots of you will benefit from it. If you want more good stuff like this be sure to check out Nick’s site above, particularly the guide to promo sites he mentions in the post above. It’s another incredibly valuable resource – a handy list of worthwhile ad venues, tiered by effectiveness, and regularly updated. Be sure to check it out here.
With the sh*t hitting the fan over at Kboards since the new owners took over, it’s more important than ever that we authors share our methods and help each other whatever way we can, and ignore those who want to pull the ladder up behind them. Kudos to Nick for sharing this analysis and Happy Advertising to all of you!

--------------------------

CreateSpace Has Closed • KDP Print Is Here
Posted by David Gaughran 25 January 2022. Publishing • 184 Comments.

## The article starts below, but first: FREE STUFF!
It’s official: Amazon has closed CreateSpace and the website is dead. If that comes as news, I’m sure you have a lot of questions – so let’s get those answered right away before we take a look at what has replaced it, what features have changed, and what alternatives you might want to consider.
- Why has CreateSpace closed?
- What about your CreateSpace books?
- KDP Print vs. CreateSpace
- Ingram Spark – worth using also?
Why has CreateSpace closed?
What about your CreateSpace books?
KDP Print vs. CreateSpace
Ingram Spark – worth using also?

## Why has CreateSpace closed?
Amazon launched a replacement service called KDP Print way back in 2016 and slowly began adding features and zapping bugs over the next couple of years. In 2018, Amazon began moving CreateSpace users over to the new platform and then closed off CreateSpace to new titles.
Overall, when you look at the new feature set for KDP Print, the migration to the new platform makes sense – despite CreateSpace’s enduring popularity among authors – at least from Amazon’s perspective. KDP Print is deeply embedded in the overall KDP Service, rather than being a (sometimes awkward) bolt-on like CreateSpace and the branding ties much more closely with all of Amazon’s other subsidiaries.
What gave Amazon the final push might have been some security issues with CreateSpace which started bringing negative media attention around money-laundering scams involving fake books and CreateSpace, at a time when Amazon was already getting a hammering in the press over various Kindle Unlimited scams.

## What about your CreateSpace books?
Don’t panic, your books remain on sale at Amazon but have now been migrated at the back-end to Amazon’s new platform, KDP Print. If you want to access them yourself for any reason, you will need go to KDP.
After Amazon stopped accepting new titles for CreateSpace in 2018 it began the migration of existing titles to KDP Print. The process was voluntary at first but became compulsory as the year continued. By 2019, all titles had transitioned to KDP Print.
If you are wondering why you weren’t notified, Amazon did email all CreateSpace users about this change – several times, in fact, throughout 2018 and 2019 – but Amazon may have had old contact details for you.
My advice: check any CreateSpace editions you may have on Amazon. There were reports of metadata getting garbled during the migration process. Categories, keywords, descriptions, titles, and author names should all be double-checked. In more extreme cases, there were issues with covers and interiors as well.
All mine migrated just fine, except for a few minor metadata issues that were easy to fix, but you should check yours, if you haven’t already.

## KDP Print vs. CreateSpace
KDP Print kept most of the old features from CreateSpace, streamlining a lot of processes and adding some new features as well. But some features were axed.
Overall, when you look at the new feature set for KDP Print, the migration to the new platform makes sense – despite CreateSpace’s enduring popularity among authors – at least from Amazon’s perspective. KDP Print is deeply embedded in the overall KDP Service, rather than being a (sometimes awkward) bolt-on like CreateSpace.
Let’s break it down.

### Publishing
The publishing process now takes place within KDP itself, and is fully integrated with your KDP dashboard. Amazon even copies across key elements like metadata to make paperback creation quicker and easier, and the process is mostly seamless.

### Categories & Keywords
Your paperbacks will be much more discoverable now on Amazon as you can add up to ten categories specifically for your paperbacks, as well as seven keyword string, just like with your Kindle editions.

### ISBNs
All new titles can avail of a free Amazon ISBN if they wish, or add their own if the prefer. If you previously availed of a free CreateSpace ISBN, then CreateSpace will continue to be listed as your publisher. All new titles using free ISBNs from KDP Print will be listed as “Independently Published.”

### Covers
KDP Print has matte covers, and I can tell you from personal experience that they are very lovely indeed. Glossy are also available, if that’s how you roll.

### Author copies
The new system for author copies had a bumpy start. The process is completely different and caused confusion – orders are now fulfilled by the regular Amazon store but authors are charged cost price, as before.
For many, this has meant reduced shipping costs – especially international authors who had to pay shipping from the USA previously.
Australian authors, however, were dismayed to see they can’t order author copies at all.

### Proof copies
Authors can still order proof copies, as before, but in a very unpopular change these come with an unsightly PROOF COPY emblazoned on the front cover, preventing authors from re-selling or re-using them in any way.

### Royalties
These are pretty much the same as before, with some minor printing cost variances with shorter books, depending on the customer’s location, being the only change to what authors get paid per sale.

### Payment
Schedules are not the same; in short, KDP print pays a month slower than CreateSpace did, which aligns things with ebooks.

### Advertising
You can now run Amazon Ads for print books, and reporting improvements now mean you can more accurately measure the success of those ads too.

### Expanded Distribution
Amazon won’t say much about it but it seems the Expanded Distribution network has been greatly scaled back – especially internationally.
Which means authors who sell a lot of print, or want superior global reach for their paperbacks, will often use Ingram Spark instead, or in conjunction with KDP Print – essentially using KDP Print to serve Amazon itself, and Ingram Spark to reach every other retailer on the planet.

## Ingram Spark
Ingram Spark is quite a bit harder to use, doesn’t pay as much as KDP Print, or as quickly, and listing your books their involves additional costs, but it has a number of key advantages which make all that more than bearable if you sell a decent amount of print or are just keen to maximize the reach of your paperback editions.
Plus the interface was revamped considerably in 2020 and is a huge improvement on the hellish process that existed before. I uploaded my entire catalog to Ingram Spark during 2020 and it was certainly worthwhile, and it’s just nice to know that readers can go into any bookstore on the planet and order one of my books.
And I’ll have a post on all that soon!

--------------------------

Elm Hill Books: Another HarperCollins Vanity Press
Posted by David Gaughran 22 January 2022. Bewares • 47 Comments.

HarperCollins now has another Christian vanity press subsidiary with five-figure publishing packages, but this time the Big 5 publisher is also pimping out its sales reps and distribution network to sell the idea to novice authors. Elm Hill Books was launched last year and is the brainchild of Pete Nikolai – the longtime Director of Publishing Services at HarperCollins Christian Publishing. And both have form when it comes to exploiting writers.

### Learning from Author Solutions at WestBow
In 2009, Pete Nikolai was working for HarperCollins subsidiary Thomas Nelson when, together with its CEO and Chairman Michael Hyatt, he partnered with Author Solutions to create WestBow Press. WestBow is a white-label Christian-flavored vanity publisher, pretty much the same any other Author Solution vanity imprint, just with a few crucifixes dotted around the place.
While Michael Hyatt subsequently reinvented himself as some kind of greasy life coach, Pete Nikolai ran WestBow as its Publisher, overseeing the sale of sub-standard publishing packages and countless, worthless marketing packages costings thousands of dollars. These marketing packages were sold using high-pressure sales tactics to unsuspecting newbies who had no business purchasing them, and little chance of recouping their investment. Not that you would know this from the kind of glowing coverage that Publishers Weekly gives WestBow.
Those marketing packages were usually sold in the most disingenuous ways too, dangling impossible dreams in front of vulnerable writers who had no idea how this industry worked. Here’s one example from the dozens of different packages available from Pete Nikolai’s WestBow Press:
Here’s another:
And another (I really could do this all day):

### Class Actions & Deceptive Practices
Successive class actions against Author Solutions – which operates WestBow on behalf of HarperCollins behind the carefully constructed façade – detailed exactly how these marketing packages are sold. A typical plaintiff described how she was contacted by an Author Solutions consultant who explained that her yet-to-be-published book had been nominated for an award (one wholly invented by Author Solutions). But to move forward for consideration she was told by Author Solutions that she must purchase a marketing package.
How The Author Solutions Scam Works
These deceptive business practices led to an outcry among writers, to the point where several companies – such as The Bookseller, Writer’s Digest, Bowker, and Barnes & Noble – all terminated partnerships with Author Solutions, no doubt mindful of the increasing reputational damage from engaging in such author unfriendly practices. But some large publishers like HarperCollins have gone in the opposite direction.
Pete Nikolai worked closely with Author Solutions over the last nine years as Publisher of WestBow Press. He obviously liked what he saw because he decided to build something in its image with Elm Hill Books. While there are some differences with the typical Author Solutions clone, that is where things get truly worrying for anyone who wants to keep clear lines between vanity publishing and its traditional, legitimate counterpart.

The approach from Elm Hill Books is nothing revolutionary, despite its bombastic claims. Publishing services are powered by FastPencil and Accurance, and offer the usual sub-par services you can find at other vanity presses it works with. In other words, HarperCollins staff won’t be editing your book or designing your cover.
Marketing services are the typical selection of questionable services you will see at any vanity press too. You can get a “web-optimized” press release, in a phrase neatly cribbed from Pete Nikolai’s pals at Author Solutions. You can get an “Amazon Preview” – which is really just the Amazon Look Inside program that Amazon does for every book.
You can become a “Professional Certified Author” — a meaningless, invented badge which will do nothing more than mark you out as a certified victim of a vanity press in the eyes of real pros (people who make a living from writing, a category unlikely to include anyone published by Elm Hill Books). That’s one of the “Revolutionary Services” offered by Elm Hill Books which includes bleeding edge innovations like “your title will be listed on Goodreads” – another service publicly provided by Amazon to any author, free of charge.

These marketing services are bundled with the publishing packages themselves, which start out at $1,399 for a bare bones package – one which doesn’t even include editing – right the way up to a staggering $13,499 for one of the top-tier “Gold Leaf Packages.”
While the basic publishing packages are overpriced for what would be a terrible way to publish your work anyway, it’s the higher-end packages which attract the most concern. And this is where HarperCollins’ hands get really dirty, and where the usual arms-length denials will hold no water.
The $13,499 package is full of all sorts of execrable crap like those aforementioned “web-optimized” press releases, which no one will ever open, let alone read or act upon; “advanced reflowable ebook formatting” which is a completely standard (and very cheap) service; free-to-anyone items like a Google Books preview or Amazon’s Look Inside or a listing on Goodreads; and a “Premium Seven-Page Website” – cookie cutter affairs of laughable quality.
But it’s the most heavily touted aspect of those top tier packages which are most troubling, and which pose serious questions for HarperCollins and Pete Nikolai. The incredible cost of the three “Gold Leaf Packages” – an obscene $7,799, $9,499, and $13,499 respectively – are justified by the dangling of access to bookstores.
This sounds good on the surface – the point, I guess – until you look a little closer. HarperCollins sales reps won’t be pitching your book to stores, let’s be very clear about that. At best, you’ll be buried in some catalogue. No one will be selling your book to stores. This is a chimera, explicitly designed to hook newbies who don’t know how this business operates. For any of them reading reading, let me explain how it actually works: HarperCollins will publish over 1,000 titles this year and the sales reps won’t even have the capacity to push all those in-house titles, which HarperCollins has actually paid money to acquire, let alone any dupes from Elm Hill Books.
Think I’m wrong about that? Elsewhere on the site, Elm Hill Books inadvertently reveals the true nature of what these packages entail: mere inclusion in the industry-wide Edelweiss catalogue, a service you can purchase elsewhere for a few hundred dollars.
An extra two grand to be slapped in a foreign rights catalogue? That takes some brass balls – especially when Elm Hill Books is grabbing half your foreign rights anyway. Yep, buried in the small print on an obscure page is the most hideous rights grab. Not only does Elm Hill Books purloin 50% of foreign rights/translations, audio rights, film/TV rights, and every other subsidiary right they can possibly think of, it also asserts the power to sell those rights without reference to the author, and without their permission. Grim stuff.
Back to the “Gold Leaf Packages.”
OK, I don’t even know WTF this is but it seems to cost an extra four grand for reasons that escape me, and I have a professional-grade imagination. It seems you can pick one city where HarperCollins sales reps will pretend to sell your book, you get some kind of… ebook which is, no doubt, packed full of advice cribbed from elsewhere, and then there is mention of some kind of exclusive selling window which is supposed to be a good thing?
I sincerely hope everyone was getting super high at this point and then just got distracted by pizza arriving because Elm Hill Books hasn’t even made a basic effort to pretend there is any kind of value in these packages.
Exploitative and lazy. Solid work all round.
I'd like to know why this behavior from @HarperCollins and @PFNikolai is deemed acceptable in publishing, and how this level of tawdry exploitation became normal. The culture of silence in this industry must end. https://t.co/URAJUyOeNN
August 24, 2018

How do HarperCollins sales reps feel about being pimped out like this? It’s not just the sales reps, but the HarperCollins name too. Even the marketing plays off this. Here’s a Facebook ad I saw this week.
We’ve seen examples before of Author Solutions playing up its links to Simon & Schuster or Penguin Random House, hoping to fool newbies into springing for their shitty packages.
But that excuse can’t be made here. Pete Nikolai, Publisher of Elm Hill Books, is a HarperCollins employee – the Director of Publishing Services at HarperCollins Christian Publishing. It’s clear that Pete Nikolai ran Westbow in such a manner which afforded him free rein with Elm Hill Books. This is what he decided to create – and Pete Nikolai is happy to pimp out the HarperCollins name, run Facebook ads under the Thomas Nelson handle, it doesn’t matter. Whatever ensnares those novice authors.
Publishers like HarperCollins like to present themselves as guardians of literature and arbiters of taste and also writers’ champions, but I believe they show their true faces here.
As for Pete Nikolai…
A guy who set up a shitty vanity press complaining about being screwed over on the internet 🤣🤣🤣 https://t.co/jmoQBtUIBG
August 22, 2018

--------------------------

Vanity Press Victims and Media Culpability
Posted by David Gaughran 17 May 2021. Bewares, Publishing • 21 Comments.

Experienced authors tend to chastise vanity press victims for not doing sufficient research, but the murky web of vanity partnerships — and the uncritical coverage which invariably accompanies same — makes it difficult for newer writers to chart a safe path.
Some vanity presses are very good at crafting a veneer of legitimacy, one which can be very convincing to those starting out. Infamous vanity press conglomerate Author Solutions figured this out very early on, creating partnerships with Penguin, Harlequin, Writer’s Digest, Random House, HarperCollins/Thomas Nelson, Hay House, Reader’s Digest, Lulu, and Barnes & Noble. (And the Author’s Guild as well, although they would very much like you to forget that.)
These partnerships served two purposes. First, they delivered an endless stream of victims directly from the companies themselves who would refer business to Author Solutions in return for a cut. Second, they helped Author Solutions whitewash its past, acting as a reputational fig leaf, hiding its seamy nature until it was too late.
It wasn’t just publishing partnerships that Author Solutions engaged in, but marketing and media partnerships too. Author Solutions sells a range of products to its customers (like all vanity presses, revenue predominantly comes from selling things to writers, rather than selling books on behalf of writers). These include themed marketing packages which promise to get you exposure in the New York Times, or reviews from industry magazines like Kirkus, or appearances at literary events — in all cases charged at staggering prices.
The media partnerships were especially insidious as they seem to have muzzled a lot of criticism — Publishers Weekly immediately comes to mind — but it turns out that not all companies which Author Solutions used in this manner were willing participants in that embrace.
I spoke with the New York Review of Books about the long-standing practice of Author Solutions re-selling ad space in its magazine. The New York Review of Books was unequivocal: it has no partnership whatsoever with Author Solutions. In fact, Author Solutions is not permitted to resell its ad space, and has been warned a number of times to discontinue the practice.
Despite this, Author Solutions continued to sell a New York Review of Books-themed marketing package across its various vanity imprints such as Xlibris, Trafford, AuthorHouse, Balboa Press, Archway, LifeRich, Palibrio, and iUniverse for some time. Indeed, at the time of writing, Author Solutions is still selling a New York Review of Books marketing pack at Archway Publishing — the vanity press it runs on behalf of Simon & Schuster.
The ad space that Archway is selling to its customers for $2,499 is being sold at a significant mark-up. Archway squeezes in fifteen books in this advertisement too, bringing in a serious sum. This mark-up looks especially bad when compared with the prices charged if you go direct to the New York Times Review of Books yourself, where you can buy a slot for $300, and you will only have to share the page with 8 other titles.
Author Solutions is also still selling a New York Review of Books package via its subsdiary Xlibris, this time for an astonishing $4,899 (although it’s unclear how many books they shoehorn into that particular ad).
The New York Review of Books had very strong words for this practice, explaining how upsetting it was that Author Solutions persisted in this manner, particularly that Author Solutions makes it sound like they have some kind of partnership with them, or that the New York Review of Books is aware of, or endorses, the practice of marking-up and reselling.
I would really appreciate it if you’d make your readers aware that if they’re being charged more than a few hundred dollars to advertise a book with New York Review of Books, they’re being scammed.

Of course, the greatest trick that Author Solutions ever pulled was getting itself purchased by Penguin in 2012 — a move which gave it instant credibility, but also generated a huge outcry among writers, particularly after a couple of class actions revealed the grim nature of its business practices in forensic detail.
However, Penguin Random House now seems to have quietly severed all links with Author Solutions. After selling the company for what is widely assumed to be a huge markdown in 2016, it still maintained various partnerships with the company. The white label vanity press Author Solutions ran for it in Africa, India, and Singapore – Partridge – now seems to have removed all the previous Penguin branding and links it had been adorned with. and it appears to be run as a standard Author Solutions imprint.
The case of Random House’s Spanish self-publishing platform MeGustaEscribir is a little different. It also seems to have dispensed with Author Solutions’ services but have held onto the platform itself, hiring another white label publishing service called Lantia to run it on their behalf instead. Although, it was amusing to note the familiar, overblown promises about being promoted by the biggest publisher in the world and joining the ranks of esteemed authors like Ken Follett and Isabel Allende, contrasting with the reality hidden in the legal small print, which clearly states that Penguin Random House would have nothing to do with the book. Some things never change.
The number of publishing partners for Author Solutions has dwindled considerably. Crossbooks, Barnes & Noble, Harlequin, and Writer’s Digest all terminated their various partnerships in the last few years, joining the likes of Bowker and The Bookseller who ended advertising/marketing relationships in 2013/14.
Some Author Solutions partnerships have proved surprisingly enduring, however. Westbow Press – the Christian-flavored vanity press infamously set up by Michael Hyatt – continues to be run by Author Solutions on behalf of Thomas Nelson/Harper Collins. And Archway, of course, is still being quietly operated by Author Solutions on behalf of Simon & Schuster, shamelessly playing up its supposed links to the New York publisher, even though the role that Simon & Schuster plays is strictly limited to delivering victims and collecting the money.
As for marketing and media partnerships, Author Solutions still re-sells products like Kirkus reviews, Guardian Weekly ad spots, and space in the New York Times Sunday Book Review, usually at exorbitant mark-ups. Whether those organizations are aware of this re-selling and price gouging is unclear as they refuse to discuss the matter. Although I should note that when the New York Times does cover Author Solutions, the coverage is unfailingly positive, despite incessant complaints from writers about those business practices. For example, the New York Times didn’t cover the class actions at all.
The case is a little clearer with literary events such as Word on Street Toronto and the Miami Book Fair. Author Solutions sells book signing packages to its customers for thousands of dollars. The organizers of these events are aware of this but have refused to put a stop to it – no doubt influenced by the large rows of booths that Author Solutions purchases at their events each year.
Another company that plays a central role in Author Solutions marketing packages is Publishers Weekly – the supposedly respectable trade industry magazine. Author Solutions sells Publishers Weekly-themed marketing packages for up to $11,999.
Not only does Publishers Weekly refuse to stamp out this exploitative practice, it has also allowed it to spread to other vanity presses such as Readers Magnet — a real shady enterprise that is said to be set up by former Author Solutions staff, which is now selling Publishers Weekly packages for an astonishing $13,999.

## The article starts below, but first: FREE STUFF!
Publishers Weekly is particularly bad on this front. While it is fond of engaging in flag-waving about its own pet issues such as Amazon’s dominance, its conscience goes very quiet indeed when it comes to accepting ad money from companies with questionable business practices. The walls between advertising and editorial are so non-existent that you will only ever see positive coverage of companies like Author Solutions, Morgan James, or Austin Macauley.
Indeed, here is Writer Beware criticizing Publishers Weekly for just that — giving glowing, uncritical coverage to companies “whose business model is largely built on author fees.”
This practice is spreading too. Porter Anderson is the editor-in-chief of Publishing Perspectives. He wrote a puff piece on Austin Macauley last week, which immediately attracted strong criticism from Writer Beware in a comment underneath. One week later, Porter Anderson has refused to explain why he is promoting this company, despite Victoria Strauss pointing him to this blog post about Austin Macauley and the 100+ comments it generated underneath.
I guess if we want an answer from @Porter_Anderson on why he's promoting Austin Macauley we'll have to rustle up a few dollars. pic.twitter.com/QKUsQGa63V
July 26, 2018
In this particular case, I think Porter Anderson’s client is Sharjah Publishing City rather than Austin Macauley (he didn’t respond to inquiries). Either way, this is another example of the influence-peddling circle jerk that is plaguing the industry. One which makes it incredibly difficult for new writers to sort the good from the bad. Especially when companies further spin that glowing coverage in their own marketing.
Hey @Porter_Anderson, this is how your Austin Macauley snow job is being portrayed by them. I hope you are proud. @VictoriaStrauss @IndieAuthorALLI pic.twitter.com/aqtrY7wrga
July 31, 2018
While I strongly urge all authors to conduct appropriate due diligence before signing any contract or handing over any money or entering into any business relationship, the preponderance of these partnerships — and the uncritical coverage which invariably accompanies them — muddies the water considerably.
Newer writers especially tend to be the most vulnerable, unaware of the many nuances in publishing. So the next time you hear someone blaming a vanity press victim for not doing their research, perhaps you should point to the famous names doing all this pimping.

--------------------------

Granular Targeting Explained • Book Marketing
Posted by David Gaughran 17 May 2021. Marketing, Resources • 17 Comments.

Granular targeting is central to succeeding with digital advertising, and has been for a long time.
I’m pretty experienced with digital advertising at this point but when I got my interview for Google AdWords back in 2003 I had to… Google it to figure out what the hell they did. And I still got it wrong!
I was quite lucky that I first interviewed with Overture (the former name of the digital advertising division of Google’s one-time rival, Yahoo) because I had absolutely no idea how these kind of ad platforms worked, let alone best practices. But I learned fast—Google’s training was excellent.
One thing that was drilled into us constantly was the importance of granular targeting. It might be a little more obvious in 2018, but back then the only really familiar advertising model was the broadcast one. Put your message in giant letters on the billboard. Flood the airwaves with ad spots. Take out full page ads in newspapers and magazines (for the kids: these are paper versions of websites that used to be popular). The basic strategy was a simple, brute force one; if the signal is strong enough, the right people will hear it.
Of course, there is a lot of waste in that model. The ever-present adage from that old world was one from John Wannamaker which was true for almost 100 years. “Half the money I spend on advertising is wasted; the trouble is I don’t know which half.”
In today’s world of Google and Facebook and targeted advertising, we can get a very clear picture of the effectiveness of our ads—click rates, conversions, engagement; we’re drowning in data.
Best practices are pretty well established in 2018 too, and it’s interesting to see how core principles haven’t changed that much in the last fifteen years. One of the most central being the importance of granular targeting.
If you have read Strangers to Superfans, you will understand the significance of developing a picture of your Ideal Reader. For those who haven’t—*glares*—it’s the basis of the new marketing paradigm I introduce in that book which takes Stephen King’s craft-based concept and moves it into the world of marketing, and plots out the process through which your Ideal Reader transforms from being unaware of your work to being its most passionate advocate.
The concept of your Ideal Reader is such a useful one in so many ways—that POV shift to the reader will transform how you craft your product and your packaging as well as your promotions—but to employ it successfully you first need to vanquish a powerful enemy: your Inner Artist.
My beret is firmly on my head when working on a book, but it most definitely gets cast aside when the time comes to sell it, because your Inner Artist will lead you astray. Your natural artistic instinct is to share your work with the world, to broadcast in all directions that you have written A Book and that everyone should read it.
I’ve explained before how dangerous it can be to do something as natural-seeming as telling your friends and family about your new book. I’ve also written about how attempting to ride the coat-tails of a popular author can backfire tremendously — ethical considerations aside. But the issue here is much more fundamental than possibly scrambled Also Boughts. The very sustainability of your promotional efforts is increasingly dependent on developing a sense of your Ideal Reader, and then marketing to them exclusively.
And I mean marketing in the broadest sense because this should inform the stuff baked into the product too: categories, keywords, covers, end matter, email autoresponders, even the tropes. But the most obvious place where you need to get really granular with that targeting is with advertising, and this is the place where we probably screw it up most often, even with the best of intentions.

A clear and simple example might be my self-publishing books. Writers come in all shapes and sizes, so, in theory a book like Let’s Get Digital or Amazon Decoded might have broad appeal, among writers who self-publish or who are curious about it, at least.
However, all the data I have tells me that most of the readership for those books are women between the age of 35 and 54. And if I run an ad on Facebook and only show it to women aged 35-54 it will perform much better than an ad targeting all those interested in self-publishing.
You might think that you are missing a lot of your potential audience like… all men, for example. But that’s the wrong way to think about it. That kind of conclusion is being influenced by the old, outdated broadcast model. You need to start thinking instead in terms of most likely purchasers.
Take Amazon for example. It doesn’t try and show you all the products it has. Instead it rearranges the store, to an extent, for each individual customer, to show them more of the things they are likely to purchase and less of the products they have less interest in. It doesn’t mean that I never have any interest in buying a banana slicer or a Nicholas Cage throw pillow, but my purchasing history clearly shows I’m much more likely to buy ebooks and cheap Chinese phone chargers that break every five minutes.
In the same way, you don’t want to show your ad to all potential customers because that would cost an incredible amount of money. To return to the example of my self-publishing books, Facebook has 2.1 billion people to whom it can serve ads, 199m of which are interesting in Writing.
That sounds like a lot of people, but maybe it’s encompassing people interesting in other kinds of writing, like copywriting and technical writing, and maybe even just consuming it. If I dig a little deeper, 7.2m of those are specifically interested in Creative Writing, which is still a crazily broad audience. Drilling down to Self-Publishing specifically only winnows the field to 1.2m. If I go further and restrict it to those interested in Self-Publishing who live in America and also own a Kindle of some kind, we are still well over a quarter of a million people — and it’s very expensive to hit an audience even of that reduced size.
So I need to drill down further. And if I narrow that last-mentioned audience by women aged 35-54, which a variety of data points have historically and consistently shown me is the demographic slice which responds best to my books, then we get a much more manageable 61,000 people.
Your Inner Artist will be wailing at the 200,000 plus that were lost in that last step alone, thinking how many Precious Readers will be cast aside with this aggressive culling, but being this granular with your targeting — I mean the general approach rather than these specific steps per se — is the only way that you can make digital advertising work for you. (And, in fact, I might well narrow the audience in that example even further.)
You are always far better off drilling right down to the subset of readers who are most likely to purchase. There might be only 10,000 such people when you get granular, but limiting your audience like this is infinitely better than advertising broadly.
Our natural inclination as artists is to be read by as many people as possible, but we must fight against that instinct when it comes to online advertising. We need to target the right people exclusively, otherwise it gets expensive fast and you will run out of money very quickly.
And there will be little coming back to you via book sales, either.
If you want to read more about the concept of the Ideal Reader and how it can improve your marketing, check out Strangers to Superfans.

--------------------------

Cassandra Dee and Mosaic Book Stuffing
Posted by David Gaughran 29 January 2021. Amazon, Bewares • 85 Comments.

The Amazon charts continue to be plagued by book stuffing, ten days into the new regime. Aside from one rather notable head on a pike — Chance Carter appears to have had his account shut down, but quite possibly for other actions — book stuffers are continuing largely as normal, only making minor tweaks to their presentation, simply appending the words “Collection” or “Compilation” to their titles and covers. And not even bothering to do that on all their (still) stuffed books.
In fact, book stuffing is so lucrative, that a whole cottage industry has sprung up around making quick tweaks to your skeavy empire.
The stuffers are clearly thumbing their noses at Amazon. They seem pretty damn confident that minor tweaks will fly, and that the whole new regulatory regime is, well, a sham. What will happen with someone like Cassandra Dee will be a good bellwether.
Cassandra Dee is the #1 author in Contemporary Romance, and she is a major book stuffer. Because of KDP’s catch-and-release approach to these guys, they are able to constantly make minor tweaks to how they stuff. I can only presume that KDP sends them communications about problematic breaches of the Content Guidelines, the stuffers make a minor tweak, and are allowed to continue… until the next time they get a KDP letter.
Why Amazon takes such a light touch approach to regulating this mess is a mystery, because these authors have purloined millions of dollars from the collective author fund in the last year alone. Perhaps if that was coming out of Amazon’s end instead of our end, we would have seen more comprehensive action by now.
These stuffers also invest most of the money back into AMS campaigns (which goes directly back to Amazon) or Facebook campaigns (which drives tens of thousands of customers to Amazon every day) and perhaps this makes them untouchable.
Because everyone in romance knows about Cassandra Dee.
Like many of the others (and there are many) Cassandra Dee has taken a number of different approaches to book stuffing, from the regular approach of just shoving in as many books as it takes to hit that max 3000 page payout, to formatting hacks to artificially boost the page count, to a pretty popular approach today which I’ll call mosaic bookstuffing — which seems to exist to try and fool Amazon into thinking that these guys are publishing genuine collections with differentiated content. But a deeper look shows that’s not the case.
Let’s take Cassandra Dee’s Pregnant By My Boss as an example. (“Kendall Blake” is listed as a co-author, but I’m working on the presumption that’s just another pen name for Cassandra Dee. Happy to be corrected.)
Anyway, Pregnant By My Boss is currently #23 in the entire Kindle Store, meaning it’s probably generating thousands of sales and borrows a day, no doubt powered by an extensive Facebook and AMS campaign. And as this tweet below proves, it contains a lot of books outside the advertised content, bumping her page count up considerably. In fact, the advertised content ends at around 8%, meaning you could read the entire advertised book in the free sample.
"Pregnant By My Boss" by Cassandree Dee/Kendall Blake is at #20 in the Kindle Store. The advertised book finishes around 7% of the way through. . This author is a Kindle All Star – earning tens of thousands of dollars a month from the communal author fund. @AmazonKDP #tiffanygate pic.twitter.com/sGcLyK71eJ
— David Gaughran (@DavidGaughran) June 9, 2018

The only change Cassandra Dee appears to have made to comply with the new rules against book stuffing is to append the word Compilation to her title — she hasn’t even bothered putting it on the cover, let alone taking out any of the 11 books which make up this very stuffed file.
I bought Pregnant By My Boss (RIP my Amazon recommendations…) to ensure I was describing the situation accurately. I noticed something interesting right away. The first thing you see is a mailing list link, and the landing page for that links to a Facebook Group called Alpha Males on Top.
The two admins of that page are Cassandra Dee and a certain PA who works with many of the major book stuffers. Chance Carter was also on her client list previously, as well as someone called Faleena Hopkins too, but I’m sure that’s a total coincidence…
Moving on the table of contents of Pregnant By My Boss. As you can see in the screenshots appended to the above tweet, the TOC is considerable, around 10 pages long. I had to spread it over three separate tweets! It contains these books:
- Pregnant By My Boss (the advertised content)
- The Boy Next Door (a book by “Jade Evans” — noted in the blurb and front matter as bonus content)
- The Billionaire’s Kitten (unadvertised content)
- The Wicked Virgin (unadvertised content)
- The Naughty Virgin (unadvertised content)
- Delivering The Virgin (unadvertised content)
- The Trashy Virgin (unadvertised content)
- The Dirty Virgin (unadvertised content)
- Beg Me (unadvertised content)
- Loving the Babysitter (unadvertised content)
- The Curvy Girl Takes Two Men (unadvertised content)
And then if the curvy girl hasn’t completely knackered you, there’s also a four-chapter Sneak Peek at the end of all those 11 stories for any readers who don’t already have a sufficient idea of the quality of Cassandra Dee’s writing.
While there is no page count listed on the Amazon product page for the book, I can see by paging through it that it has 20,000 locations, meaning a page count in Amazon’s KU system of, I estimate, around 3,000 pages, which just so happens to be the maximum payout mark, or $13.50 for the author, if you prefer.
Moving on to this actual content, Pregnant By My Boss ends at 8% of the way through the file. Meaning that if Cassandra Dee had published that book on its own, as she should, it would be (rough estimate) around 240 pages, or $1.08 per readthrough. Even allowing for some error in my rough estimates, the difference is considerable.
Let’s look at what is bulking up this book file.
First up is The Boy Next Door by “Jade Evans” which I presume is yet another pen name for Cassandra Dee, but, again, I’m happy to be corrected. This book appears to be exclusive content, and is flagged both in the blurb and the front matter. Had Cassandra Dee stopped there, she might have been in the clear.
But she didn’t.
Next up is The Billionaire’s Kitten. This book is not advertised in the blurb or front matter. Here is the note in the blurb in case it gets… tweaked at a future point:
The Billionaire’s Kitten is sold separately on Amazon, and that edition of The Billionaire’s Kitten elsewhere on Amazon is also stuffed, containing the following books in the table of contents. Also note the click-to-the-end inducement. I’d estimate this book is around 2,250 pages long, meaning that when a reader clicks on that inducement, Cassandra Dee gets an instant payout of around $10.12 instead of the $1.51 she should get for just having The Billionaire’s Kitten read.
(Note: there is a false impression circulating that the click-to-the-end loophole has been closed. This is not true. We have tested it on multiple devices and the loophole only appears to have been closed on certain devices. Also, there are related tricks in play which I’m not going to make public for obvious reasons. Similarly incorrect rumors surround the kind of KU formatting hacks used by Tia Siren — those most certainly do still work and inflate your page count.)

Anyway, you’ll see the edition of The Billionaire’s Kitten also contains the full books of The Wicked Virgin, The Naughty Virgin, Delivering The Virgin, The Trashy Virgin, The Dirty Virgin, Beg Me, and The Curvy Girl Takes Two Men. Amusingly, the latter is marked “NEW” because presumably her readers will have encountered all these other books before. We’re certainly about to encounter the same books over and over.
Back to our scheduled programming of examining the content of Pregnant By My Boss. Third up in this carnival of deflowering is The Wicked Virgin — a book we have already seen stuffed inside The Billionaire’s Kitten. It too is sold separately on Amazon, and is stuffed, containing three books, the advertised content, plus two unflagged books by Cassandra Dee: Ruthless and Obsessed.
Fourth up in this tome is The Naughty Virgin — which we also saw inside The Billionaire’s Kitten. Also sold separately on Amazon, and is stuffed with just one extra title: Scandal. We’ll get back to why there is such a miserly approach in this particular book in a moment but a similar approach is taken with the next book — Delivering The Virgin — which has just Crazy in the back when sold separately on Amazon. And with the next two books after that: The Trashy Virgin and The Dirty Virgin. Both of those are sold separately on Amazon too, and have Double Huge and A Baby for the Billionaire stuffed in the back respectively.
Ninth in the list of this never-ending book pleasekillmenow is Beg Me — continuing the pattern of lighter stuffing on the backlist with just Addicted in the back. Tenth is Loving the Babysitter with our old friend Double Massive lurking in the back. And rounding out this gallery of rogues is The Curvy Girl Takes Two Men which turns out not to be as exclusive as promised in the table of contents of The Billionaire’s Kitten, because it is stuffed in here too.
In case you are worried that Cassandra Dee is running out of stamina and losing the will to stuff, there is a pattern to these varying amounts of stuffing. Newer, higher ranked, more visible books will be stuffed to the maximum. Older, lower ranked, less visible books get content peeled out of them and then recycled once more in the newer, more likely to be borrowed, books. No doubt this mosaic-style approach and constantly shifting contents also keeps Amazon’s detection systems on their toes.
But the pattern is clear. For example, here is Cassandra Dee’s next highest-ranked book. My Boyfriend’s Boss is ranked #60 in the entire Kindle Store (she has another at #73 too, making her more popular overall right now than Nora Roberts, if the Amazon Contemporary Romance Author charts are to be believed).
And because My Boyfriend’s Boss is highly ranked and more likely to be borrowed, that’s stuffed to the max. Here’s the table of contents:
The content ends at 24% of the book file. But this book is not billed as a Collection or Compilation, and no additional content is indicated, so she hasn’t even bothered paying minimal lip service to the new regulations. I estimate the file is around 2,200 pages long, meaning she could earn maybe $9.90 or so per borrow.
The contents are familiar too, containing many books we have seen multiple times: The Dirty Virgin, A Baby for the Billionaire, Loving The Babysitter, Ruthless, Obsessed, and the Twin Stepbrothers Exposed. And as detailed above, many of those titles are in turn sold separately on Amazon and stuffed themselves.
It’s Stuffedception, is what I’m saying.
The mosaic pattern of stuffing aside, the danger of continued Amazon inaction is clear too. As these book stuffers purloin more and more money from the communal author fund, they can plow that back into further books, which are then heavily advertised on AMS and Facebook, giving them more titles to recycle and switch around, making any future detection efforts even harder.
Which also blocks off all the chart positions and advertising spots for any other romance authors, or any other type of romance book… if that matters to anyone at Amazon HQ, who seem happy to let the amazing bookstore they diligently built fall into complete disrepair. A pity.

## The article starts below, but first: FREE STUFF!
And to all the poor authors currently suffering from another round of page read stripping — which I’ll be blogging about soon — I can only guess at how frustrating you must find all this.
UPDATE June 15: Someone made this helpful visualization of the scale of Cassandra Dee’s book stuffing. It’s quite something. Please share if you can…
Here is a visualization of the book stuffing cheats used by Amazon's (supposedly) #1 Contemporary Romance Author – Cassandra Dee. Most repeated books are color coded to show how blatant this is. It's nuts. And this is just one of her pen names… #GetLoud #Tiffanygate pic.twitter.com/YxjKysF5sk
— David Gaughran (@DavidGaughran) June 15, 2018

--------------------------

